Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. Recently, the Huberman Lab podcast Recently, the Huberman Lab podcast Recently, the Huberman Lab podcast hosted a live event at the Wiltern hosted a live event at the Wiltern hosted a live event at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles. It was entitled Theater in Los Angeles. It was entitled Theater in Los Angeles. It was entitled the Brain-Body Contract. The first part the Brain-Body Contract. The first part the Brain-Body Contract. The first part of the evening was a lecture about of the evening was a lecture about of the evening was a lecture about science and science-based tools for science and science-based tools for science and science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. The second half was a performance. The second half was a performance. The second half was a question and answer period in which the question and answer period in which the question and answer period in which the audience asked me questions from the audience asked me questions from the audience asked me questions from the podcast or related to their own podcast or related to their own podcast or related to their own interests or things that they've gleaned interests or things that they've gleaned interests or things that they've gleaned from social media or just general from social media or just general from social media or just general questions about mental health, physical questions about mental health, physical questions about mental health, physical health, and performance, and I answered health, and performance, and I answered health, and performance, and I answered those questions for them. We wanted to those questions for them. We wanted to those questions for them. We wanted to make the recorded version of that make the recorded version of that make the recorded version of that question and answer session available to question and answer session available to question and answer session available to everybody, regardless of who could everybody, regardless of who could everybody, regardless of who could attend. So, what follows is the question attend. So, what follows is the question attend. So, what follows is the question and answer period from the Wiltern and answer period from the Wiltern and answer period from the Wiltern Theater Brain-Body Contract live Theater Brain-Body Contract live Theater Brain-Body Contract live Huberman Lab event. I want to be sure to Huberman Lab event. I want to be sure to Huberman Lab event. I want to be sure to thank the sponsors from that event. They thank the sponsors from that event. They thank the sponsors from that event. They were Eight Sleep, which makes smart were Eight Sleep, which makes smart were Eight Sleep, which makes smart mattress covers with heating and cooling mattress covers with heating and cooling mattress covers with heating and cooling capacity. I started sleeping on an Eight capacity. I started sleeping on an Eight capacity. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover about eight months Sleep mattress cover about eight months Sleep mattress cover about eight months ago, and it has completely transformed ago, and it has completely transformed ago, and it has completely transformed my sleep. I sleep so much deeper. I wake my sleep. I sleep so much deeper. I wake my sleep. I sleep so much deeper. I wake up far less during the middle of the up far less during the middle of the up far less during the middle of the night, if at all, and I wake up feeling night, if at all, and I wake up feeling night, if at all, and I wake up feeling far better than I ever have, even after far better than I ever have, even after far better than I ever have, even after the same amount of sleep. In fact, I the same amount of sleep. In fact, I the same amount of sleep. In fact, I love my Eight Sleep so much that when I love my Eight Sleep so much that when I love my Eight Sleep so much that when I travel, now I'm quite bothered that travel, now I'm quite bothered that travel, now I'm quite bothered that Airbnbs and hotels don't have Eight Airbnbs and hotels don't have Eight Airbnbs and hotels don't have Eight Sleep mattress covers on them, and I've Sleep mattress covers on them, and I've Sleep mattress covers on them, and I've even shipped my Eight Sleep mattress even shipped my Eight Sleep mattress even shipped my Eight Sleep mattress cover out to meet me in the location cover out to meet me in the location cover out to meet me in the location that I arrive to so that I get the best that I arrive to so that I get the best that I arrive to so that I get the best possible sleep. If you want to try Eight possible sleep. If you want to try Eight possible sleep. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to Sleep, you can go to Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $400 off their Sleep Fit to save up to $400 off their Sleep Fit to save up to $400 off their Sleep Fit Holiday Bundle, which includes their new Holiday Bundle, which includes their new Holiday Bundle, which includes their new Pod 3 Cover. Eight Sleep currently ships Pod 3 Cover. Eight Sleep currently ships Pod 3 Cover. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, in the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, in the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, select countries in the EU, and select countries in the EU, and select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's Australia. Again, that's Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. I'd like to also thank our supplement I'd like to also thank our supplement I'd like to also thank our supplement partner, Momentous. partner, Momentous. partner, Momentous. They make the very highest quality They make the very highest quality They make the very highest quality supplements. They ship internationally, supplements. They ship internationally, supplements. They ship internationally, and they've formulated supplements as and they've formulated supplements as and they've formulated supplements as single ingredient formulations that single ingredient formulations that single ingredient formulations that match what is discussed on the Huberman match what is discussed on the Huberman match what is discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast. If you're interested in any Lab podcast. If you're interested in any Lab podcast. If you're interested in any of those supplements, please go to of those supplements, please go to of those supplements, please go to livemomentous.com/huberman. And now, without further ado, the And now, without further ado, the And now, without further ado, the question and answer period from the question and answer period from the question and answer period from the Huberman Lab live event in Los Angeles. What occurs in the mind-body when you What occurs in the mind-body when you What occurs in the mind-body when you have ADHD? Are there ways to address it have ADHD? Are there ways to address it have ADHD? Are there ways to address it without medication? without medication? without medication? Um thank you for this question. So, Um thank you for this question. So, Um thank you for this question. So, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder used to be called ADD. Um the used to be called ADD. Um the used to be called ADD. Um the hyperactivity part is a little hyperactivity part is a little hyperactivity part is a little misleading. And again, I'm not a misleading. And again, I'm not a misleading. And again, I'm not a clinician here. Um here's what we know clinician here. Um here's what we know clinician here. Um here's what we know works for some people. And yet, there works for some people. And yet, there works for some people. And yet, there are always going to be side effects of are always going to be side effects of are always going to be side effects of any kind of chemical any kind of chemical any kind of chemical um manipulation, which is that um manipulation, which is that um manipulation, which is that we know that people, kids and adults we know that people, kids and adults we know that people, kids and adults with ADHD, actually have a tremendous with ADHD, actually have a tremendous with ADHD, actually have a tremendous capacity to focus if they like what capacity to focus if they like what capacity to focus if they like what they're focusing on. You take a kid with they're focusing on. You take a kid with they're focusing on. You take a kid with ADHD who can't focus, and you give them their who can't focus, and you give them their who can't focus, and you give them their favorite video game, and they are a favorite video game, and they are a favorite video game, and they are a laser. The threshold to access the dopamine The threshold to access the dopamine The threshold to access the dopamine system is higher. system is higher. system is higher. And dopamine has this incredible ability And dopamine has this incredible ability And dopamine has this incredible ability to focus to focus to focus the brain and other aspects of the brain and other aspects of the brain and other aspects of the nervous system. nervous system. nervous system. You know, certainly if people require You know, certainly if people require You know, certainly if people require medication, I'm not going to tell you to medication, I'm not going to tell you to medication, I'm not going to tell you to stop taking that medication. But the stop taking that medication. But the stop taking that medication. But the focus training exercises that have been focus training exercises that have been focus training exercises that have been explored mainly in China, but they're explored mainly in China, but they're explored mainly in China, but they're starting to be explored in starting to be explored in starting to be explored in over here as well, over here as well, over here as well, do seem to be of benefit. And these are, do seem to be of benefit. And these are, do seem to be of benefit. And these are, as they sound, they use them in schools as they sound, they use them in schools as they sound, they use them in schools in China now, which are literally visual in China now, which are literally visual in China now, which are literally visual focus exercises. Your mental focus, that focus exercises. Your mental focus, that focus exercises. Your mental focus, that is, your ability to focus on things is, your ability to focus on things is, your ability to focus on things cognitively, follows your visual focus. cognitively, follows your visual focus. cognitively, follows your visual focus. And of course, your stress will anchor And of course, your stress will anchor And of course, your stress will anchor your essentially put you in a soda straw if essentially put you in a soda straw if essentially put you in a soda straw if you were the world. So, yes, there are you were the world. So, yes, there are you were the world. So, yes, there are um non-medication based treatments. By um non-medication based treatments. By um non-medication based treatments. By medication, I'm assuming you mean medication, I'm assuming you mean medication, I'm assuming you mean prescription medication. There are of prescription medication. There are of prescription medication. There are of course supplement based medications that course supplement based medications that course supplement based medications that will increase dopamine, mainly will increase dopamine, mainly will increase dopamine, mainly L-tyrosine. Again, this is something to think Again, this is something to think Again, this is something to think carefully about before you start carefully about before you start carefully about before you start tampering with your dopamine system, but tampering with your dopamine system, but tampering with your dopamine system, but it is the L-tyrosine is the it is the L-tyrosine is the it is the L-tyrosine is the precursor to dopamine. precursor to dopamine. precursor to dopamine. So, it will raise your dopamine levels. So, it will raise your dopamine levels. So, it will raise your dopamine levels. But, I believe, and you'll hear me say But, I believe, and you'll hear me say But, I believe, and you'll hear me say this as many times as necessary, that this as many times as necessary, that this as many times as necessary, that one should, if you can, rely on one should, if you can, rely on one should, if you can, rely on behavioral tools first, then of course behavioral tools first, then of course behavioral tools first, then of course sleep and nutrition and are prerequisite sleep and nutrition and are prerequisite sleep and nutrition and are prerequisite again for all mental health, physical again for all mental health, physical again for all mental health, physical health, performance. You simply can't health, performance. You simply can't health, performance. You simply can't neglect those. And then, and only then, neglect those. And then, and only then, neglect those. And then, and only then, if those all of that isn't working, to if those all of that isn't working, to if those all of that isn't working, to rely on supplement based tools or on rely on supplement based tools or on rely on supplement based tools or on prescription medication. prescription medication. prescription medication. So, it's clear that So, it's clear that So, it's clear that Vyvanse, Adderall, Ritalin, etc. work Vyvanse, Adderall, Ritalin, etc. work Vyvanse, Adderall, Ritalin, etc. work for ADHD, but some people choose to rely for ADHD, but some people choose to rely for ADHD, but some people choose to rely on more subtle forms of pharmacologic on more subtle forms of pharmacologic on more subtle forms of pharmacologic manipulation like L-tyrosine. And this manipulation like L-tyrosine. And this manipulation like L-tyrosine. And this focusing exercise focusing exercise focusing exercise essentially consists of spending 1 to 3 essentially consists of spending 1 to 3 essentially consists of spending 1 to 3 minutes trying to maintain visual focus. minutes trying to maintain visual focus. minutes trying to maintain visual focus. And yes, you're allowed to blink. I And yes, you're allowed to blink. I And yes, you're allowed to blink. I don't know why we tend to stare at don't know why we tend to stare at don't know why we tend to stare at something we don't blink, but don't let something we don't blink, but don't let something we don't blink, but don't let your eyes dry out. And that can increase your eyes dry out. And that can increase your eyes dry out. And that can increase your ability to focus your ability to focus your ability to focus cognitively, and it works. cognitively, and it works. cognitively, and it works. And keep in mind that And keep in mind that And keep in mind that focusing always involves refocusing. We focusing always involves refocusing. We focusing always involves refocusing. We covered a beautiful data set, not covered a beautiful data set, not covered a beautiful data set, not collected by my lab, but by Wendy collected by my lab, but by Wendy collected by my lab, but by Wendy Suzuki's lab at NYU, that at roughly 10 Suzuki's lab at NYU, that at roughly 10 Suzuki's lab at NYU, that at roughly 10 minute, it's actually 13 minute a day minute, it's actually 13 minute a day minute, it's actually 13 minute a day meditation of the sort where you just meditation of the sort where you just meditation of the sort where you just focus on your breathing, has been shown focus on your breathing, has been shown focus on your breathing, has been shown to improve focus significantly. Why to improve focus significantly. Why to improve focus significantly. Why don't we hear about this more? Well, don't we hear about this more? Well, don't we hear about this more? Well, she's now Dean of Arts and Sciences at she's now Dean of Arts and Sciences at she's now Dean of Arts and Sciences at NYU, and all the students are hearing NYU, and all the students are hearing NYU, and all the students are hearing about it. Hopefully they're doing it, about it. Hopefully they're doing it, about it. Hopefully they're doing it, but it takes a little bit of discipline. but it takes a little bit of discipline. but it takes a little bit of discipline. For some reason, For some reason, For some reason, 10 minute a day type meditation is 10 minute a day type meditation is 10 minute a day type meditation is something that very few people follow something that very few people follow something that very few people follow consistently. But if you're looking for consistently. But if you're looking for consistently. But if you're looking for non medication-based treatments for ADHD or medication-based treatments for ADHD or medication-based treatments for ADHD or you're somebody who just struggles with you're somebody who just struggles with you're somebody who just struggles with focus, the focusing exercise or the focus, the focusing exercise or the focus, the focusing exercise or the meditation I just described can be very meditation I just described can be very meditation I just described can be very useful. So say the data. useful. So say the data. useful. So say the data. Yeah, thanks for bringing up space-time Yeah, thanks for bringing up space-time Yeah, thanks for bringing up space-time bridging. Are people familiar with what bridging. Are people familiar with what bridging. Are people familiar with what space-time bridging is? I haven't talked space-time bridging is? I haven't talked space-time bridging is? I haven't talked a lot about it. Okay, this is thanks for a lot about it. Okay, this is thanks for a lot about it. Okay, this is thanks for bringing that up. We actually have an bringing that up. We actually have an bringing that up. We actually have an episode on meditation coming up soon episode on meditation coming up soon episode on meditation coming up soon where I cover it. And I talked about it where I cover it. And I talked about it where I cover it. And I talked about it long ago and then I kind of abandoned it long ago and then I kind of abandoned it long ago and then I kind of abandoned it because um because um because um well, we wanted more data and it's a well, we wanted more data and it's a well, we wanted more data and it's a pretty interesting technique. pretty interesting technique. pretty interesting technique. You know, if you think about now the You know, if you think about now the You know, if you think about now the nervous system and vision in particular, nervous system and vision in particular, nervous system and vision in particular, but if you're not a sighted person or but if you're not a sighted person or but if you're not a sighted person or you're low vision or no vision, you you're low vision or no vision, you you're low vision or no vision, you could do this with your hearing. But I'm could do this with your hearing. But I'm could do this with your hearing. But I'm going to assume most people here are going to assume most people here are going to assume most people here are sighted. Um if not, just translate this to the Um if not, just translate this to the Um if not, just translate this to the auditory system. You have this auditory system. You have this auditory system. You have this incredible ability to close your eyes incredible ability to close your eyes incredible ability to close your eyes and focus for instance on People talk and focus for instance on People talk and focus for instance on People talk about the third eye center, you know, about the third eye center, you know, about the third eye center, you know, focusing right behind your forehead. Do focusing right behind your forehead. Do focusing right behind your forehead. Do you know why you know why you know why people do that when they meditate? people do that when they meditate? people do that when they meditate? The reason is that you actually have no The reason is that you actually have no The reason is that you actually have no sensation in your brain. It's the one sensation in your brain. It's the one sensation in your brain. It's the one place to place to place to focus your attention for which you focus your attention for which you focus your attention for which you abandon sensation. abandon sensation. abandon sensation. Right? If I think about any portion of Right? If I think about any portion of Right? If I think about any portion of my body or my breathing, I'm either I'm my body or my breathing, I'm either I'm my body or my breathing, I'm either I'm going to sense what's happening. I'm going to sense what's happening. I'm going to sense what's happening. I'm going to perceive my inter- inner going to perceive my inter- inner going to perceive my inter- inner landscape, so-called interoception. landscape, so-called interoception. landscape, so-called interoception. Or my outer If I look out into the Or my outer If I look out into the Or my outer If I look out into the world, it's exteroception. When you world, it's exteroception. When you world, it's exteroception. When you focus your attention with your eyes focus your attention with your eyes focus your attention with your eyes closed, just you do have to close your closed, just you do have to close your closed, just you do have to close your eyes just behind your forehead, you are eyes just behind your forehead, you are eyes just behind your forehead, you are focusing on your thinking. focusing on your thinking. focusing on your thinking. Right? Sort of obvious, but I don't at Right? Sort of obvious, but I don't at Right? Sort of obvious, but I don't at least to me it never been stated that least to me it never been stated that least to me it never been stated that clearly. Again, one of the problems with clearly. Again, one of the problems with clearly. Again, one of the problems with some of the more traditional practices, some of the more traditional practices, some of the more traditional practices, but also the problem with science is but also the problem with science is but also the problem with science is that there's a shrouding of everything that there's a shrouding of everything that there's a shrouding of everything in very complex language, in very complex language, in very complex language, which sucks. which sucks. which sucks. Why does it suck? Because it's a Why does it suck? Because it's a Why does it suck? Because it's a separator. You eliminate the number of separator. You eliminate the number of separator. You eliminate the number of people that could be brought to people that could be brought to people that could be brought to potentially useful practices. And I potentially useful practices. And I potentially useful practices. And I don't like it when don't like it when don't like it when people, including myself, over use people, including myself, over use people, including myself, over use mechanism and descriptions of, you know, mechanism and descriptions of, you know, mechanism and descriptions of, you know, fancy phrases to mask basic principles. fancy phrases to mask basic principles. fancy phrases to mask basic principles. So, simplest language I think is a So, simplest language I think is a So, simplest language I think is a uh it tends to unify people around the it tends to unify people around the it tends to unify people around the practices. So, when you focus on this practices. So, when you focus on this practices. So, when you focus on this so-called third eye center, right or so-called third eye center, right or so-called third eye center, right or spot right behind your forehead or on spot right behind your forehead or on spot right behind your forehead or on your breath, it's a little tricky with your breath, it's a little tricky with your breath, it's a little tricky with the breath, but when you focus in on the breath, but when you focus in on the breath, but when you focus in on your frontal cortex, there's nothing to sense frontal cortex, there's nothing to sense frontal cortex, there's nothing to sense because there's no sensory neurons because there's no sensory neurons because there's no sensory neurons there. There's no touch, there's no there. There's no touch, there's no there. There's no touch, there's no pain, nothing. That's why in these gory pain, nothing. That's why in these gory pain, nothing. That's why in these gory movies, you know, you can take the skull movies, you know, you can take the skull movies, you know, you can take the skull off and or in the neurosurgery, they're off and or in the neurosurgery, they're off and or in the neurosurgery, they're poking around in there, the person's poking around in there, the person's poking around in there, the person's playing a violin. playing a violin. playing a violin. Like no anesthetic. No anesthetic, Like no anesthetic. No anesthetic, Like no anesthetic. No anesthetic, doesn't require anesthetic, there's no doesn't require anesthetic, there's no doesn't require anesthetic, there's no sensory neurons. sensory neurons. sensory neurons. Can't sense anything there. Can't sense anything there. Can't sense anything there. So, space-time bridging involves So, space-time bridging involves So, space-time bridging involves it's essentially a meditation, but it's essentially a meditation, but it's essentially a meditation, but it's really a perceptual exercise. I think really a perceptual exercise. I think really a perceptual exercise. I think that's where we're going with this. Is that's where we're going with this. Is that's where we're going with this. Is it starts by closing your eyes and it starts by closing your eyes and it starts by closing your eyes and focusing on that location for which focusing on that location for which focusing on that location for which there's no sensation, there's only there's no sensation, there's only there's no sensation, there's only thought. And then thought. And then thought. And then opening your eyes and focusing on a opening your eyes and focusing on a opening your eyes and focusing on a location maybe about the distance of location maybe about the distance of location maybe about the distance of your hand. your hand. your hand. And you focus also on your breathing, so And you focus also on your breathing, so And you focus also on your breathing, so you sort of imagine a kind of a tether you sort of imagine a kind of a tether you sort of imagine a kind of a tether between that you can split your between that you can split your between that you can split your attention to these two locations. So, attention to these two locations. So, attention to these two locations. So, you're thinking about your body and you're thinking about your body and you're thinking about your body and you're thinking about a location outside you're thinking about a location outside you're thinking about a location outside of you. And then you, while continuing of you. And then you, while continuing of you. And then you, while continuing to think about your body, so-called to think about your body, so-called to think about your body, so-called interoception, focused on your interoception, focused on your interoception, focused on your breathing, you focus further out and breathing, you focus further out and breathing, you focus further out and then further out and then further out then further out and then further out then further out and then further out and then ultimately, you know that and then ultimately, you know that and then ultimately, you know that little cartoon or meme where they're little cartoon or meme where they're little cartoon or meme where they're like, we're just a little blue dot like, we're just a little blue dot like, we're just a little blue dot floating in a big universe and like it's floating in a big universe and like it's floating in a big universe and like it's supposed to make all your problems go supposed to make all your problems go supposed to make all your problems go away. Like it kind of it works because what Like it kind of it works because what Like it kind of it works because what you've done is you've expanded your you've done is you've expanded your you've done is you've expanded your perception and you go, oh yeah, like the perception and you go, oh yeah, like the perception and you go, oh yeah, like the stuff that's happening in here is really stuff that's happening in here is really stuff that's happening in here is really important when I'm focused on what's important when I'm focused on what's important when I'm focused on what's happening in here." happening in here." happening in here." But when I'm focused on what's going on But when I'm focused on what's going on But when I'm focused on what's going on and the kind of the vastness of and the kind of the vastness of and the kind of the vastness of all this and we're just a little, you all this and we're just a little, you all this and we're just a little, you know, pale blue dot and all that, it know, pale blue dot and all that, it know, pale blue dot and all that, it changes your perception. changes your perception. changes your perception. Not just your visual perception, Not just your visual perception, Not just your visual perception, obviously. Changing your visual obviously. Changing your visual obviously. Changing your visual perception changes your cognitive perception changes your cognitive perception changes your cognitive perception, which changes your emotional perception, which changes your emotional perception, which changes your emotional experience. So, the space-time bridging experience. So, the space-time bridging experience. So, the space-time bridging is a is a perceptual exercise where you is a is a perceptual exercise where you is a is a perceptual exercise where you step from focusing internally to step from focusing internally to step from focusing internally to focusing externally at a short distance, focusing externally at a short distance, focusing externally at a short distance, then a further distance, further then a further distance, further then a further distance, further distance, further distance, and then distance, further distance, and then distance, further distance, and then trying to imagine yourself in this trying to imagine yourself in this trying to imagine yourself in this larger landscape. It sounds very larger landscape. It sounds very larger landscape. It sounds very mystical, but it's actually very mystical, but it's actually very mystical, but it's actually very neurobiological and it captures neurobiological and it captures neurobiological and it captures something really amazing. Why is the T something really amazing. Why is the T something really amazing. Why is the T in there? The time, space-time bridging. in there? The time, space-time bridging. in there? The time, space-time bridging. Cuz this is space, but time is in there Cuz this is space, but time is in there Cuz this is space, but time is in there because when you focus in close, because when you focus in close, because when you focus in close, your slicing of time is finer. You your slicing of time is finer. You your slicing of time is finer. You notice the subtle fluctuations in your notice the subtle fluctuations in your notice the subtle fluctuations in your breathing and things that are happening breathing and things that are happening breathing and things that are happening up close. up close. up close. Whereas when you focus further out, your Whereas when you focus further out, your Whereas when you focus further out, your perception of time actually changes, perception of time actually changes, perception of time actually changes, which is why in panoramic vision we are which is why in panoramic vision we are which is why in panoramic vision we are calm. And when you think about we're calm. And when you think about we're calm. And when you think about we're just a pale blue dot and we mostly only just a pale blue dot and we mostly only just a pale blue dot and we mostly only live to about 85 or maybe 100 years old live to about 85 or maybe 100 years old live to about 85 or maybe 100 years old and then like my what's happening right and then like my what's happening right and then like my what's happening right now, and my boss being a jerk and all now, and my boss being a jerk and all now, and my boss being a jerk and all that doesn't really matter because, you that doesn't really matter because, you that doesn't really matter because, you know, like the earth is spinning and all know, like the earth is spinning and all know, like the earth is spinning and all that kind of stuff, which is all true that kind of stuff, which is all true that kind of stuff, which is all true and is the stuff of philosophy and is the stuff of philosophy and is the stuff of philosophy and mindfulness and I think is beautiful. mindfulness and I think is beautiful. mindfulness and I think is beautiful. What you're really doing is you're What you're really doing is you're What you're really doing is you're changing your time perception by changing your time perception by changing your time perception by changing your space perception. So, changing your space perception. So, changing your space perception. So, space-time bridging is very useful space-time bridging is very useful space-time bridging is very useful because most people get locked at one because most people get locked at one because most people get locked at one step, one of these stations, especially step, one of these stations, especially step, one of these stations, especially under conditions of stress. And people under conditions of stress. And people under conditions of stress. And people who have a trouble who have a trouble who have a trouble focusing, I'm glad you brought this up focusing, I'm glad you brought this up focusing, I'm glad you brought this up in this context in this context in this context of ADHD. People who have a hard time of ADHD. People who have a hard time of ADHD. People who have a hard time focusing, whether or not they have ADHD focusing, whether or not they have ADHD focusing, whether or not they have ADHD or not, tend to skip back and forth or not, tend to skip back and forth or not, tend to skip back and forth between different space-time domains, as between different space-time domains, as between different space-time domains, as we call them in science. So, this is a we call them in science. So, this is a we call them in science. So, this is a simple exercise that you can do focusing simple exercise that you can do focusing simple exercise that you can do focusing internally then stepping out externally internally then stepping out externally internally then stepping out externally then stepping back in all the while then stepping back in all the while then stepping back in all the while paying attention to your inner landscape paying attention to your inner landscape paying attention to your inner landscape just simply by focusing on your just simply by focusing on your just simply by focusing on your breathing. Um it's a tool that we're still Um it's a tool that we're still Um it's a tool that we're still collecting data on in terms of its collecting data on in terms of its collecting data on in terms of its utility, but people are already using it utility, but people are already using it utility, but people are already using it and um I don't think of it as a and um I don't think of it as a and um I don't think of it as a meditation. I think of it as a meditation. I think of it as a meditation. I think of it as a perceptual exercise. Thanks for asking perceptual exercise. Thanks for asking perceptual exercise. Thanks for asking that. Okay, as a teenager, what are five that. Okay, as a teenager, what are five that. Okay, as a teenager, what are five things you would recommend to physically things you would recommend to physically things you would recommend to physically feel my best? I'm a 15-year-old surfer feel my best? I'm a 15-year-old surfer feel my best? I'm a 15-year-old surfer who attends high school and plays who attends high school and plays who attends high school and plays soccer. Well, it sounds like you're soccer. Well, it sounds like you're soccer. Well, it sounds like you're doing a lot of things right. doing a lot of things right. doing a lot of things right. Um to physically feel your best. to physically feel your best. to physically feel your best. Okay, so I'm going to grasp at some Okay, so I'm going to grasp at some Okay, so I'm going to grasp at some context here that I'm not um context here that I'm not um context here that I'm not um that's not within reach. Um I'm assuming that's not within reach. Um I'm assuming that's not within reach. Um I'm assuming if you are if you are if you are doing all these things, you're hopefully doing all these things, you're hopefully doing all these things, you're hopefully doing a bunch of other things too and doing a bunch of other things too and doing a bunch of other things too and there going to be demands on you that there going to be demands on you that there going to be demands on you that you probably some of them you don't want you probably some of them you don't want you probably some of them you don't want to do school and things like that um are to do school and things like that um are to do school and things like that um are going to have varying going to have varying going to have varying levels of like joy and delight and levels of like joy and delight and levels of like joy and delight and demand um demand um demand um of things you don't want to do. I of things you don't want to do. I of things you don't want to do. I I'm not I don't want to default always I'm not I don't want to default always I'm not I don't want to default always to the simplest of tools, but I to the simplest of tools, but I to the simplest of tools, but I certainly think that even as a certainly think that even as a certainly think that even as a 15-year-old, if you're not already getting a lots and if you're not already getting a lots and if you're not already getting a lots and lots of sleep, that's going to be great. lots of sleep, that's going to be great. lots of sleep, that's going to be great. Tell your parents that I said you should Tell your parents that I said you should Tell your parents that I said you should get lots and lots of sleep. get lots and lots of sleep. get lots and lots of sleep. Right, you're not sleeping through Right, you're not sleeping through Right, you're not sleeping through classes. I am a professor after all. I classes. I am a professor after all. I classes. I am a professor after all. I couldn't uh tell you otherwise. Um couldn't uh tell you otherwise. Um couldn't uh tell you otherwise. Um you know, I would say if I could travel you know, I would say if I could travel you know, I would say if I could travel back in time as a 15-year-old, I would back in time as a 15-year-old, I would back in time as a 15-year-old, I would encourage you to cultivate some sort of encourage you to cultivate some sort of encourage you to cultivate some sort of mindfulness practice. I know this sounds mindfulness practice. I know this sounds mindfulness practice. I know this sounds a little cliché, but having some a little cliché, but having some a little cliché, but having some awareness of awareness of awareness of your thinking about your thinking is your thinking about your thinking is your thinking about your thinking is good, but I'm actually not going to say good, but I'm actually not going to say good, but I'm actually not going to say sit down and meditate for 10 minutes a sit down and meditate for 10 minutes a sit down and meditate for 10 minutes a day or do NSDR. I'm actually not going or do NSDR. I'm actually not going or do NSDR. I'm actually not going to tell you that. I think given how to tell you that. I think given how to tell you that. I think given how plastic your brain is, how much it's plastic your brain is, how much it's plastic your brain is, how much it's changing at 15, I would encourage you changing at 15, I would encourage you changing at 15, I would encourage you and maybe you would set a timer for this and maybe you would set a timer for this and maybe you would set a timer for this to actually develop just a really keen to actually develop just a really keen to actually develop just a really keen awareness of what stresses you out, what relaxes of what stresses you out, what relaxes of what stresses you out, what relaxes you, what delights you, what delights you, what delights you, etc. And just to simply develop an etc. And just to simply develop an etc. And just to simply develop an awareness of that awareness of that awareness of that because those are your antennae. because those are your antennae. because those are your antennae. And I certainly And I certainly And I certainly had a meditation practice as a youth, had a meditation practice as a youth, had a meditation practice as a youth, mostly given to me because I was a mostly given to me because I was a mostly given to me because I was a little haywire and I needed it. little haywire and I needed it. little haywire and I needed it. Um and it worked pretty well, but I Um and it worked pretty well, but I Um and it worked pretty well, but I think in retrospect think in retrospect think in retrospect what I wish I had developed was more of what I wish I had developed was more of what I wish I had developed was more of a sense of a sense of a sense of you know, how I navigated stress or you know, how I navigated stress or you know, how I navigated stress or things and things and things and things I enjoyed and things I didn't things I enjoyed and things I didn't things I enjoyed and things I didn't enjoy. And I would just encourage you to enjoy. And I would just encourage you to enjoy. And I would just encourage you to have a general awareness, try and detect have a general awareness, try and detect have a general awareness, try and detect and learn about what and learn about what and learn about what raises your adrenaline, what raises your raises your adrenaline, what raises your raises your adrenaline, what raises your dopamine, what raises your serotonin, dopamine, what raises your serotonin, dopamine, what raises your serotonin, and then start thinking about tools. Um and then start thinking about tools. Um and then start thinking about tools. Um but again, but again, but again, the awareness is going to be very the awareness is going to be very the awareness is going to be very valuable and gosh, as a 15-year-old, you valuable and gosh, as a 15-year-old, you valuable and gosh, as a 15-year-old, you are in this, you know, amazing, blessed are in this, you know, amazing, blessed are in this, you know, amazing, blessed period of heightened neuroplasticity. period of heightened neuroplasticity. period of heightened neuroplasticity. Should we all be so lucky. So, enjoy it. Next question, please. Next question, please. Next question, please. Clarity on adrenaline regarding cold Clarity on adrenaline regarding cold Clarity on adrenaline regarding cold water. Should we wait to feel the rise water. Should we wait to feel the rise water. Should we wait to feel the rise of adrenaline, the get me out of here of adrenaline, the get me out of here of adrenaline, the get me out of here feeling, and the fall of it before feeling, and the fall of it before feeling, and the fall of it before bailing? Yes. bailing? Yes. bailing? Yes. Provided it doesn't kill you. Provided it doesn't kill you. Provided it doesn't kill you. You know, I don't want to say cold You know, I don't want to say cold You know, I don't want to say cold water it's hard to kill yourself with water it's hard to kill yourself with water it's hard to kill yourself with cold water. Um cold water. Um cold water. Um provided your head's above and you're provided your head's above and you're provided your head's above and you're breathing, but the breathing, but the breathing, but the um it's Sorry, my podcast producers always like Sorry, my podcast producers always like Sorry, my podcast producers always like I can't I can't help that. The Anyway, I can't I can't help that. The Anyway, I can't I can't help that. The Anyway, um it's a great tool. it's a great tool. it's a great tool. And different days it'll feel different. And different days it'll feel different. And different days it'll feel different. So, for instance, doing cold any kind of So, for instance, doing cold any kind of So, for instance, doing cold any kind of adrenaline in deliberate cold exposure adrenaline in deliberate cold exposure adrenaline in deliberate cold exposure or adrenaline increasing activity early or adrenaline increasing activity early or adrenaline increasing activity early in the day, you might find that you are in the day, you might find that you are in the day, you might find that you are more {quote} resilient than later. In more {quote} resilient than later. In more {quote} resilient than later. In other words, the wall like I really other words, the wall like I really other words, the wall like I really don't want to do this. This is actually don't want to do this. This is actually don't want to do this. This is actually interesting for I think it extends interesting for I think it extends interesting for I think it extends beyond cold water. Let's say you really beyond cold water. Let's say you really beyond cold water. Let's say you really don't want to do something. don't want to do something. don't want to do something. Pay attention to the fact that maybe Pay attention to the fact that maybe Pay attention to the fact that maybe it's not the right thing to do, but it's not the right thing to do, but it's not the right thing to do, but assuming it's something that you know assuming it's something that you know assuming it's something that you know you should do, but you don't want to do, you should do, but you don't want to do, you should do, but you don't want to do, you are already in the first wall of you are already in the first wall of you are already in the first wall of adrenaline. You don't experience it necessarily as You don't experience it necessarily as You don't experience it necessarily as heightened levels of stress. heightened levels of stress. heightened levels of stress. You might experience it as heightened You might experience it as heightened You might experience it as heightened levels of fatigue or a hard time levels of fatigue or a hard time levels of fatigue or a hard time shifting on that kind of activation shifting on that kind of activation shifting on that kind of activation state that's required to move through state that's required to move through state that's required to move through the thing, but I do encourage you the thing, but I do encourage you the thing, but I do encourage you to take advantage of that. Of course, to take advantage of that. Of course, to take advantage of that. Of course, and we have an episode coming out and we have an episode coming out and we have an episode coming out tomorrow actually that answers questions tomorrow actually that answers questions tomorrow actually that answers questions like should you train if you're sick and like should you train if you're sick and like should you train if you're sick and you know, what if you travel and you know, what if you travel and you know, what if you travel and you know, there's context always. know, there's context always. know, there's context always. But I think that you do want to But I think that you do want to But I think that you do want to experience the if you want to get the experience the if you want to get the experience the if you want to get the most out of the cold water exposure and most out of the cold water exposure and most out of the cold water exposure and to be more specific the adrenaline, to be more specific the adrenaline, to be more specific the adrenaline, then you want to get to that point of I then you want to get to that point of I then you want to get to that point of I really want to get out of here, but I really want to get out of here, but I really want to get out of here, but I know I can stay in safely, but I really know I can stay in safely, but I really know I can stay in safely, but I really want to get out of here. want to get out of here. want to get out of here. And it's a little hard to explain, And it's a little hard to explain, And it's a little hard to explain, but there's just so much learning but there's just so much learning but there's just so much learning in those short moments about where your in those short moments about where your in those short moments about where your mind goes. mind goes. mind goes. And this sounds very kind of again And this sounds very kind of again And this sounds very kind of again subjective and maybe a little subjective and maybe a little subjective and maybe a little wishy-washy, but you can realize great wishy-washy, but you can realize great wishy-washy, but you can realize great things about yourself in those moments. things about yourself in those moments. things about yourself in those moments. You can find insight You can find insight You can find insight in those moments. Also, keep in mind in those moments. Also, keep in mind in those moments. Also, keep in mind that the degree of discomfort, not just that the degree of discomfort, not just that the degree of discomfort, not just physical, but mental discomfort physical, but mental discomfort physical, but mental discomfort is directly predictive of the pain to directly predictive of the pain to directly predictive of the pain to pleasure wave that you'll experience pleasure wave that you'll experience pleasure wave that you'll experience afterwards. The reason it feels so good afterwards. The reason it feels so good afterwards. The reason it feels so good when you get out of the ice bath and when you get out of the ice bath and when you get out of the ice bath and you're showered off. I always do the you're showered off. I always do the you're showered off. I always do the warm shower after. I don't do this end warm shower after. I don't do this end warm shower after. I don't do this end on cold thing. on cold thing. on cold thing. I don't know. It just seems a little too I don't know. It just seems a little too I don't know. It just seems a little too painful. And then take a warm shower and painful. And then take a warm shower and painful. And then take a warm shower and then you feel great. And that's the then you feel great. And that's the then you feel great. And that's the surge of dopamine that we know, based on surge of dopamine that we know, based on surge of dopamine that we know, based on a paper published in the European a paper published in the European a paper published in the European Journal Physiology, last many hours, and Journal Physiology, last many hours, and Journal Physiology, last many hours, and it's a 100 to 200% increase in dopamine. it's a 100 to 200% increase in dopamine. it's a 100 to 200% increase in dopamine. It is not a subtle effect. And then It is not a subtle effect. And then It is not a subtle effect. And then people say, "Well, wait, is that people say, "Well, wait, is that people say, "Well, wait, is that dopamine going to crash my dopamine going to crash my dopamine going to crash my dopamine system?" No, because it's a nice slow system?" No, because it's a nice slow system?" No, because it's a nice slow rise. In fact, I'm actually not aware of rise. In fact, I'm actually not aware of rise. In fact, I'm actually not aware of many things besides love and delight many things besides love and delight many things besides love and delight that can create this long, slow that can create this long, slow that can create this long, slow arc of dopamine lasting many hours. arc of dopamine lasting many hours. arc of dopamine lasting many hours. Maybe you're aware of other things. If Maybe you're aware of other things. If Maybe you're aware of other things. If you are, let me know. But you are, let me know. But you are, let me know. But it turns out that long arc is an a true it turns out that long arc is an a true it turns out that long arc is an a true antidepressant. And my colleague at antidepressant. And my colleague at antidepressant. And my colleague at Stanford, Dr. Anna Lembke, who's ahead Stanford, Dr. Anna Lembke, who's ahead Stanford, Dr. Anna Lembke, who's ahead of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic, of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic, of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic, has talked about in her amazing book has talked about in her amazing book has talked about in her amazing book Dopamine Nation about patients of hers Dopamine Nation about patients of hers Dopamine Nation about patients of hers that have really helped themselves along that have really helped themselves along that have really helped themselves along and out of the more depressive phases of and out of the more depressive phases of and out of the more depressive phases of you know, you know, working through you know, you know, working through you know, you know, working through addiction and in just depression in addiction and in just depression in addiction and in just depression in general through directed cold water general through directed cold water general through directed cold water therapy. So, I you know, I'm obviously a therapy. So, I you know, I'm obviously a therapy. So, I you know, I'm obviously a fanatic about it in the sense that it's fanatic about it in the sense that it's fanatic about it in the sense that it's a powerful, relatively safe, if done a powerful, relatively safe, if done a powerful, relatively safe, if done properly, safe, if done properly, way to properly, safe, if done properly, way to properly, safe, if done properly, way to modulate your internal dopamine. modulate your internal dopamine. modulate your internal dopamine. Hopefully, I answered your question. Hopefully, I answered your question. Hopefully, I answered your question. Next question, please. Uh sorry, I caught it right as it went Uh sorry, I caught it right as it went Uh sorry, I caught it right as it went off. The fall as well. Yes, I think you off. The fall as well. Yes, I think you off. The fall as well. Yes, I think you should get out once you're once you're should get out once you're once you're should get out once you're once you're you've accomplished something. Don't get you've accomplished something. Don't get you've accomplished something. Don't get out when you panic, unless it's out when you panic, unless it's out when you panic, unless it's dangerous. Sorry. dangerous. Sorry. dangerous. Sorry. How can you train your brain to feel How can you train your brain to feel How can you train your brain to feel more confident in moments where you tend more confident in moments where you tend more confident in moments where you tend to feel intimidated? Ah. to feel intimidated? Ah. to feel intimidated? Ah. Okay. These are Okay. These are Okay. These are hard question. hard question. hard question. Um because context is tricky here, cuz I Um because context is tricky here, cuz I Um because context is tricky here, cuz I don't know what the context is. don't know what the context is. don't know what the context is. And, you know, confidence on short time And, you know, confidence on short time And, you know, confidence on short time scales and then long time scales. So, and then long time scales. So, and then long time scales. So, confidence in school, confidence in confidence in school, confidence in confidence in school, confidence in career, those are, you know, those are career, those are, you know, those are career, those are, you know, those are long arc things. Whereas, confidence to long arc things. Whereas, confidence to long arc things. Whereas, confidence to be able to be able to be able to you know, do something in the short term you know, do something in the short term you know, do something in the short term is different. But remember those action is different. But remember those action is different. But remember those action sequences that trigger the release of sequences that trigger the release of sequences that trigger the release of dopamine. Dopamine I've mainly dopamine. Dopamine I've mainly dopamine. Dopamine I've mainly talked about the dark side of dopamine, talked about the dark side of dopamine, talked about the dark side of dopamine, but I hopefully also talked about the but I hopefully also talked about the but I hopefully also talked about the sort of upward spiral that dopamine can sort of upward spiral that dopamine can sort of upward spiral that dopamine can cause mainly by thinking about delight cause mainly by thinking about delight cause mainly by thinking about delight and things that you really enjoy. The and things that you really enjoy. The and things that you really enjoy. The That carries over. That carries over. That carries over. And I would say that And I would say that And I would say that you want to you want to you want to you want to micro slice the demands of you want to micro slice the demands of you want to micro slice the demands of what's maybe got you back on your heels what's maybe got you back on your heels what's maybe got you back on your heels a bit. a bit. a bit. Um actually a good friend of mine who's Um actually a good friend of mine who's Um actually a good friend of mine who's here tonight, I think also my friend here tonight, I think also my friend here tonight, I think also my friend Pat, you know, he has a great way of Pat, you know, he has a great way of Pat, you know, he has a great way of you know, conceptualizing this which is, you know, conceptualizing this which is, you know, conceptualizing this which is, you know, for most all endeavors we you know, for most all endeavors we you know, for most all endeavors we either feel back on our heels, either feel back on our heels, either feel back on our heels, flat-footed, or forward center of mass. flat-footed, or forward center of mass. flat-footed, or forward center of mass. Like we can really do something. We're Like we can really do something. We're Like we can really do something. We're flat-footed, we're back on our heels. flat-footed, we're back on our heels. flat-footed, we're back on our heels. And sometimes getting from back on our And sometimes getting from back on our And sometimes getting from back on our heels, let's call that lack of heels, let's call that lack of heels, let's call that lack of confidence to just, you know, on two confidence to just, you know, on two confidence to just, you know, on two feet and confident enough to move feet and confident enough to move feet and confident enough to move forward or at least stay in the in the forward or at least stay in the in the forward or at least stay in the in the game. That's going to require you could lean That's going to require you could lean That's going to require you could lean on different tools. on different tools. on different tools. I can't say which would be ideal for the I can't say which would be ideal for the I can't say which would be ideal for the circumstance you're you have in mind, circumstance you're you have in mind, circumstance you're you have in mind, but I do think that having a way to calm but I do think that having a way to calm but I do think that having a way to calm yourself will give you access to more yourself will give you access to more yourself will give you access to more resources, internal resources. We know resources, internal resources. We know resources, internal resources. We know this. This was something I meant to this. This was something I meant to this. This was something I meant to bring up during the discussion about bring up during the discussion about bring up during the discussion about fear versus love, etc. Trying to access fear versus love, etc. Trying to access fear versus love, etc. Trying to access delight and love. delight and love. delight and love. When we are in a state of fear When we are in a state of fear When we are in a state of fear or stress or anxiety, or stress or anxiety, or stress or anxiety, the rule set, the rule set, the rule set, the options available to us and indeed our options available to us and indeed our options available to us and indeed our creativity is greatly diminished. creativity is greatly diminished. creativity is greatly diminished. And this has to do with the way that the And this has to do with the way that the And this has to do with the way that the prefrontal cortex interacts with an area prefrontal cortex interacts with an area prefrontal cortex interacts with an area of the brain called the insula, which of the brain called the insula, which of the brain called the insula, which relates to our internal landscape. And relates to our internal landscape. And relates to our internal landscape. And there's this weird phenomenon, which is there's this weird phenomenon, which is there's this weird phenomenon, which is that normally our brain, our thinking that normally our brain, our thinking that normally our brain, our thinking brain, and our rule-setting brain can it leads and our rule-setting brain can it leads and our rule-setting brain can it leads our the brain parts that the brain parts that the brain parts that control and pay attention to how we feel control and pay attention to how we feel control and pay attention to how we feel internally. And that's why for instance, internally. And that's why for instance, internally. And that's why for instance, if you feel a little nervous, you can if you feel a little nervous, you can if you feel a little nervous, you can still do something. At some point you still do something. At some point you still do something. At some point you get stressed enough and it we know this get stressed enough and it we know this get stressed enough and it we know this from work by my colleague David Spiegel, from work by my colleague David Spiegel, from work by my colleague David Spiegel, it reverses. it reverses. it reverses. And these areas of the brain that are And these areas of the brain that are And these areas of the brain that are paying attention like how flushed my paying attention like how flushed my paying attention like how flushed my face is or whether or not I'm sweating face is or whether or not I'm sweating face is or whether or not I'm sweating or my breathing actually start to or my breathing actually start to or my breathing actually start to shut down creative decision-making. shut down creative decision-making. shut down creative decision-making. So I would say the way to have more So I would say the way to have more So I would say the way to have more confidence is to learn to control that confidence is to learn to control that confidence is to learn to control that stress and keep the part of your brain, stress and keep the part of your brain, stress and keep the part of your brain, the prefrontal cortex is that part, the prefrontal cortex is that part, the prefrontal cortex is that part, that can come up with new rules that can that can come up with new rules that can that can come up with new rules that can be funny, that can be creative, be funny, that can be creative, be funny, that can be creative, that keeps that brain part leading. The that keeps that brain part leading. The that keeps that brain part leading. The way to think about this is that the way to think about this is that the way to think about this is that the prefrontal cortex is sort of like the prefrontal cortex is sort of like the prefrontal cortex is sort of like the coach and the rest of your brain are coach and the rest of your brain are coach and the rest of your brain are sort of like the players and if you get sort of like the players and if you get sort of like the players and if you get too stressed, the players start to lead too stressed, the players start to lead too stressed, the players start to lead the game and the coach follows and kind the game and the coach follows and kind the game and the coach follows and kind of drags them along. So I would of drags them along. So I would of drags them along. So I would encourage you to focus on real-time encourage you to focus on real-time encourage you to focus on real-time stress modulation and to raise your stress modulation and to raise your stress modulation and to raise your stress threshold using the sorts of stress threshold using the sorts of stress threshold using the sorts of tools we talked about. And to register tools we talked about. And to register tools we talked about. And to register your wins. You know, I didn't get into your wins. You know, I didn't get into your wins. You know, I didn't get into this in too much detail, but one of the this in too much detail, but one of the this in too much detail, but one of the amazing things about the dopamine system amazing things about the dopamine system amazing things about the dopamine system is that it's highly subject to your is that it's highly subject to your is that it's highly subject to your interpretation. If you tell yourself If you tell yourself If you tell yourself that a fail was a win that a fail was a win that a fail was a win and you can see or conceptualize some and you can see or conceptualize some and you can see or conceptualize some way in which that's actually true, way in which that's actually true, way in which that's actually true, you get to tap into the dopamine system. you get to tap into the dopamine system. you get to tap into the dopamine system. You might think that's crazy, you can You might think that's crazy, you can You might think that's crazy, you can cheat your own brain. You can cheat your cheat your own brain. You can cheat your cheat your own brain. You can cheat your own neurochemistry and indeed you can. own neurochemistry and indeed you can. own neurochemistry and indeed you can. You can change the time space-time You can change the time space-time You can change the time space-time referencing. We see this with examples referencing. We see this with examples referencing. We see this with examples like Nelson Mandela or Victor Frankl. like Nelson Mandela or Victor Frankl. like Nelson Mandela or Victor Frankl. You know, you read their stories, right? You know, you read their stories, right? You know, you read their stories, right? Trapped in little cells, Trapped in little cells, Trapped in little cells, right? Confined, imprisoned, and they right? Confined, imprisoned, and they right? Confined, imprisoned, and they come up with new ways to access the come up with new ways to access the come up with new ways to access the dopamine system by dopamine system by dopamine system by now not thinking about what they're not now not thinking about what they're not now not thinking about what they're not getting, but thinking about what they getting, but thinking about what they getting, but thinking about what they can control in their immediate can control in their immediate can control in their immediate experience. Many, many examples of this experience. Many, many examples of this experience. Many, many examples of this throughout literature and history. throughout literature and history. throughout literature and history. And the dopamine system is And the dopamine system is And the dopamine system is the life force system. I don't say that the life force system. I don't say that the life force system. I don't say that in any loose way. Dopamine is in any loose way. Dopamine is in any loose way. Dopamine is life force. It's the wish and the desire life force. It's the wish and the desire life force. It's the wish and the desire to continue. to continue. to continue. It's persistence. And so persistence. And so persistence. And so if you can think about what might seem if you can think about what might seem if you can think about what might seem like a failure and really spend some like a failure and really spend some like a failure and really spend some time thinking about not the potential time thinking about not the potential time thinking about not the potential wins on the outside, but how you can wins on the outside, but how you can wins on the outside, but how you can conceptualize that as a potential win conceptualize that as a potential win conceptualize that as a potential win internally, you really do internally, you really do internally, you really do get to achieve an internal get to achieve an internal get to achieve an internal chemical win, and that chemical win sets chemical win, and that chemical win sets chemical win, and that chemical win sets you up for more you up for more you up for more real wins. Hope that makes sense. It's real wins. Hope that makes sense. It's real wins. Hope that makes sense. It's incredible how contextualized the incredible how contextualized the incredible how contextualized the dopamine system is, but if it weren't, dopamine system is, but if it weren't, dopamine system is, but if it weren't, why would it matter if we're talking why would it matter if we're talking why would it matter if we're talking about money or mates or food or job or about money or mates or food or job or about money or mates or food or job or school? You don't get 50 reward systems school? You don't get 50 reward systems school? You don't get 50 reward systems and motivation systems. You get one. and motivation systems. You get one. and motivation systems. You get one. And that's the dopamine system. Next question, please. What is the Next question, please. What is the Next question, please. What is the competing mechanism behind bilateral eye competing mechanism behind bilateral eye competing mechanism behind bilateral eye movement EMDR that helps resolve movement EMDR that helps resolve movement EMDR that helps resolve psychological trauma? psychological trauma? psychological trauma? The competing mechanism. The competing mechanism. The competing mechanism. Uh Well, let me let me try and answer as Well, let me let me try and answer as Well, let me let me try and answer as best I can. I'm not sure I understand best I can. I'm not sure I understand best I can. I'm not sure I understand the full extent of the question, but let the full extent of the question, but let the full extent of the question, but let me um let me um let me um EMDR, moving your eyes from side to EMDR, moving your eyes from side to EMDR, moving your eyes from side to side. Right? Then then recounting a trauma is Right? Then then recounting a trauma is Right? Then then recounting a trauma is a very common and actually one of the a very common and actually one of the a very common and actually one of the four approved treatments that are behavioral approved treatments that are behavioral approved treatments that are behavioral for trauma. for trauma. for trauma. Um so it's con- taken seriously in the Um so it's con- taken seriously in the Um so it's con- taken seriously in the psychiatric and psychological community psychiatric and psychological community psychiatric and psychological community with good reason. It tends to work best with good reason. It tends to work best with good reason. It tends to work best for single event traumas as opposed to for single event traumas as opposed to for single event traumas as opposed to like entire childhoods. like entire childhoods. like entire childhoods. Um no joke there. Like you know, some Um no joke there. Like you know, some Um no joke there. Like you know, some people have their entire childhood was people have their entire childhood was people have their entire childhood was traumatic. Other people they experience traumatic. Other people they experience traumatic. Other people they experience a trauma. a trauma. a trauma. Uh single event trauma or repeated Uh single event trauma or repeated Uh single event trauma or repeated periods of the same periods of the same periods of the same or similar type of trauma. or similar type of trauma. or similar type of trauma. Eye movements from side to side have Eye movements from side to side have Eye movements from side to side have been shown in a number of studies to been shown in a number of studies to been shown in a number of studies to very potently reduce the activity of a very potently reduce the activity of a very potently reduce the activity of a brain structure called the amygdala, brain structure called the amygdala, brain structure called the amygdala, which most people are familiar with which most people are familiar with which most people are familiar with because of the character from the Star because of the character from the Star because of the character from the Star Wars movie, amygdala. Wars movie, amygdala. Wars movie, amygdala. Um there's a neuroscientist somewhere on there's a neuroscientist somewhere on there's a neuroscientist somewhere on the that team. the that team. the that team. Um it is indeed a threat detection Um it is indeed a threat detection Um it is indeed a threat detection center and when you move through space center and when you move through space center and when you move through space not outer space, but when you walk like not outer space, but when you walk like not outer space, but when you walk like this, your eyes actually generate these this, your eyes actually generate these this, your eyes actually generate these subtle side-to-side shifts unless you're subtle side-to-side shifts unless you're subtle side-to-side shifts unless you're focusing on a specific target. focusing on a specific target. focusing on a specific target. And my lab and other laboratories have found my lab and other laboratories have found my lab and other laboratories have found that leads to a very potent that leads to a very potent that leads to a very potent quieting of the threat detection system. quieting of the threat detection system. quieting of the threat detection system. And then EMDR is essentially a process And then EMDR is essentially a process And then EMDR is essentially a process of pairing that calmer of pairing that calmer of pairing that calmer state with no threat detection system state with no threat detection system state with no threat detection system activated with the recount of something activated with the recount of something activated with the recount of something that normally would be quite triggering. that normally would be quite triggering. that normally would be quite triggering. So, it's you've heard of Pavlovian So, it's you've heard of Pavlovian So, it's you've heard of Pavlovian conditioning like a bell rings and the conditioning like a bell rings and the conditioning like a bell rings and the animal gets fed and animal gets fed and animal gets fed and animal salivates, eventually just the animal salivates, eventually just the animal salivates, eventually just the bell will evoke the salivation. You're bell will evoke the salivation. You're bell will evoke the salivation. You're doing the reverse of that. It's a called doing the reverse of that. It's a called doing the reverse of that. It's a called behavioral desensitization as an behavioral desensitization as an behavioral desensitization as an underlying mechanism, etc. But, the idea underlying mechanism, etc. But, the idea underlying mechanism, etc. But, the idea is to pair a calm state with recount of is to pair a calm state with recount of is to pair a calm state with recount of something. It has been shown to be successful. It has been shown to be successful. It has been shown to be successful. There are people There are people There are people who think that the side-to-side eye who think that the side-to-side eye who think that the side-to-side eye movements and the recount of trauma may movements and the recount of trauma may movements and the recount of trauma may actually be invoking some form of actually be invoking some form of actually be invoking some form of hypnosis. Um my colleague David Spiegel you know, Um my colleague David Spiegel you know, Um my colleague David Spiegel you know, expert in clinical hypnosis. He's expert in clinical hypnosis. He's expert in clinical hypnosis. He's appeared on my podcast, Rich Roll's appeared on my podcast, Rich Roll's appeared on my podcast, Rich Roll's podcast, and a few other podcasts and podcast, and a few other podcasts and podcast, and a few other podcasts and talks about this. He says not stage talks about this. He says not stage talks about this. He says not stage hypnosis, it's clinical hypnosis. So, hypnosis, it's clinical hypnosis. So, hypnosis, it's clinical hypnosis. So, there may be something going on there. there may be something going on there. there may be something going on there. EMDR, again, some people get great EMDR, again, some people get great EMDR, again, some people get great relief from it, other people don't. relief from it, other people don't. relief from it, other people don't. What's kind of nice is that this eye What's kind of nice is that this eye What's kind of nice is that this eye movements from side to side or simply movements from side to side or simply movements from side to side or simply taking a walk as long as you're not taking a walk as long as you're not taking a walk as long as you're not looking at your phone and not allowing looking at your phone and not allowing looking at your phone and not allowing your eyes to move from side to side your eyes to move from side to side your eyes to move from side to side is a very good way to shut down the fear is a very good way to shut down the fear is a very good way to shut down the fear and stress system. and stress system. and stress system. So, taking a walk I think is relaxing So, taking a walk I think is relaxing So, taking a walk I think is relaxing for obvious reasons and there are data for obvious reasons and there are data for obvious reasons and there are data showing that, you know, part of the showing that, you know, part of the showing that, you know, part of the reason why animals scratch at the door reason why animals scratch at the door reason why animals scratch at the door and want to go for a walk may not and want to go for a walk may not and want to go for a walk may not actually be the exercise. There's kind actually be the exercise. There's kind actually be the exercise. There's kind of an anxiety and then an anxiety relief of an anxiety and then an anxiety relief of an anxiety and then an anxiety relief that occurs. And of course they probably that occurs. And of course they probably that occurs. And of course they probably have to go to the bathroom, too. One of have to go to the bathroom, too. One of have to go to the bathroom, too. One of Costello's great joys in life was just Costello's great joys in life was just Costello's great joys in life was just peeing on everything. Um peeing on everything. Um peeing on everything. Um outdoors, thankfully. Um so, the outdoors, thankfully. Um so, the outdoors, thankfully. Um so, the psychological trauma re-wiring, psychological trauma re-wiring, psychological trauma re-wiring, unfortunately there haven't been a lot unfortunately there haven't been a lot unfortunately there haven't been a lot of brain imaging studies long looking at of brain imaging studies long looking at of brain imaging studies long looking at this long-term of how well EMDR works. this long-term of how well EMDR works. this long-term of how well EMDR works. What I think is going to happen in the What I think is going to happen in the What I think is going to happen in the next few years, by the way, is it is not next few years, by the way, is it is not next few years, by the way, is it is not going to be a discussion around should going to be a discussion around should going to be a discussion around should you do EMDR, should you do transcranial you do EMDR, should you do transcranial you do EMDR, should you do transcranial magnetic stimulation, should you do magnetic stimulation, should you do magnetic stimulation, should you do behavioral therapy. It's going to be behavioral therapy. It's going to be behavioral therapy. It's going to be combination therapies. Combination combination therapies. Combination combination therapies. Combination therapies including pharmacological therapies including pharmacological therapies including pharmacological manipulations to manipulations to manipulations to essentially give a boost to the systems essentially give a boost to the systems essentially give a boost to the systems that encourage neuroplasticity like that encourage neuroplasticity like that encourage neuroplasticity like dopamine and serotonin and adrenaline dopamine and serotonin and adrenaline dopamine and serotonin and adrenaline and then also then perform and then also then perform and then also then perform EMDR. And if you want to talk about EMDR. And if you want to talk about EMDR. And if you want to talk about what's happening in the landscape of what's happening in the landscape of what's happening in the landscape of clinical trials on some of the clinical trials on some of the clinical trials on some of the psychedelics, I'm happy to talk about psychedelics, I'm happy to talk about psychedelics, I'm happy to talk about it. They're still illegal it. They're still illegal it. They're still illegal um but they are being used in clinical um but they are being used in clinical um but they are being used in clinical trials and very interesting stuff is trials and very interesting stuff is trials and very interesting stuff is happening there. happening there. happening there. Okay, next question, please. What new Okay, next question, please. What new Okay, next question, please. What new research or interventions are you most research or interventions are you most research or interventions are you most excited about in the realm of health and excited about in the realm of health and excited about in the realm of health and wellness? So, what I think is going to be very what I think is going to be very what I think is going to be very interesting in the next few years really interesting in the next few years really interesting in the next few years really reflects my I don't know if obsession reflects my I don't know if obsession reflects my I don't know if obsession that you've seen a little bit of that you've seen a little bit of that you've seen a little bit of tonight, but the thing that I think is tonight, but the thing that I think is tonight, but the thing that I think is going to be most useful and I've seen going to be most useful and I've seen going to be most useful and I've seen this in science before and I think we're this in science before and I think we're this in science before and I think we're going to see it in health and wellness going to see it in health and wellness going to see it in health and wellness is that there are all these tools and is that there are all these tools and is that there are all these tools and all these people and all these people and all these people and he's saying this and she's saying that he's saying this and she's saying that he's saying this and she's saying that and what we're going to start paying and what we're going to start paying and what we're going to start paying attention to is what are the common attention to is what are the common attention to is what are the common themes. Right? If it If it If it and a broader and more important theme and a broader and more important theme and a broader and more important theme is going to be one of modulation versus is going to be one of modulation versus is going to be one of modulation versus mediation. What do I mean? Well, mediation. What do I mean? Well, mediation. What do I mean? Well, if someone were to pull a fire alarm if someone were to pull a fire alarm if someone were to pull a fire alarm right now, and please don't, right now, and please don't, right now, and please don't, that will shift our attention and make that will shift our attention and make that will shift our attention and make it hard to focus on what I'm saying, and it hard to focus on what I'm saying, and it hard to focus on what I'm saying, and knowing me, I'd probably just stay up knowing me, I'd probably just stay up knowing me, I'd probably just stay up here talking. here talking. here talking. Do we think that fire alarms Do we think that fire alarms Do we think that fire alarms mediate attention? No, mediate attention? No, mediate attention? No, they modulate it, right? If it were they modulate it, right? If it were they modulate it, right? If it were very, very cold in this room, like it very, very cold in this room, like it very, very cold in this room, like it was when we first got here tonight, or was when we first got here tonight, or was when we first got here tonight, or arctic cold, um arctic cold, um arctic cold, um hopefully it's warmed up a bit. Uh hopefully it's warmed up a bit. Uh hopefully it's warmed up a bit. Uh It hasn't. I'm so sorry. It hasn't. I'm so sorry. It hasn't. I'm so sorry. So sorry. Um yeah, I attempted to Yeah. So sorry. Um yeah, I attempted to Yeah. So sorry. Um yeah, I attempted to Yeah. I almost had thought maybe we all just I almost had thought maybe we all just I almost had thought maybe we all just do a bunch of breathing to heat up like do a bunch of breathing to heat up like do a bunch of breathing to heat up like adrenaline release, but I don't know, adrenaline release, but I don't know, adrenaline release, but I don't know, these days getting a group of people to these days getting a group of people to these days getting a group of people to all breathe on each other is not exactly all breathe on each other is not exactly all breathe on each other is not exactly a, you know, I can see that might go the a, you know, I can see that might go the a, you know, I can see that might go the wrong way in terms of what people wrong way in terms of what people wrong way in terms of what people interpret. So, interpret. So, interpret. So, the The idea here is that certain things The idea here is that certain things The idea here is that certain things directly mediate something. Like a directly mediate something. Like a directly mediate something. Like a physiological side directly calms you physiological side directly calms you physiological side directly calms you down quickly. It mediates the calming down quickly. It mediates the calming down quickly. It mediates the calming response. Getting good sleep makes you less easily Getting good sleep makes you less easily Getting good sleep makes you less easily triggered. It modulates stress. But is triggered. It modulates stress. But is triggered. It modulates stress. But is sleeping directly mediating stress sleeping directly mediating stress sleeping directly mediating stress control? No. And I think this is really control? No. And I think this is really control? No. And I think this is really important, and this brings up the topic important, and this brings up the topic important, and this brings up the topic of the gut-brain axis. of the gut-brain axis. of the gut-brain axis. The gut is rich with these little The gut is rich with these little The gut is rich with these little bugs, bacteria, trillions of them, which bugs, bacteria, trillions of them, which bugs, bacteria, trillions of them, which is an eerie thought to me. But also the is an eerie thought to me. But also the is an eerie thought to me. But also the surface of your skin, the surface of surface of your skin, the surface of surface of your skin, the surface of your eyes, you have a skin microbiome, a your eyes, you have a skin microbiome, a your eyes, you have a skin microbiome, a nasal microbiome. Every mucosal lining nasal microbiome. Every mucosal lining nasal microbiome. Every mucosal lining has a microbiome. In fact, think about has a microbiome. In fact, think about has a microbiome. In fact, think about this. It's This is a crazy, but worthwhile tangent. This is a crazy, but worthwhile tangent. This is a crazy, but worthwhile tangent. Have you ever bitten the inside of your Have you ever bitten the inside of your Have you ever bitten the inside of your mouth? It sucks, right? And you got to cut uh It sucks, right? And you got to cut uh It sucks, right? And you got to cut uh hurt. But guess what? hurt. But guess what? hurt. But guess what? The inside of your mouth heals without a The inside of your mouth heals without a The inside of your mouth heals without a scar. Think about that. Weird, right? You cut Think about that. Weird, right? You cut Think about that. Weird, right? You cut anywhere else on your body and depending anywhere else on your body and depending anywhere else on your body and depending on how well you heal and your age and on how well you heal and your age and on how well you heal and your age and your immune status, you get a scar. your immune status, you get a scar. your immune status, you get a scar. Your mouth is filled with bacteria and Your mouth is filled with bacteria and Your mouth is filled with bacteria and it's open to the world. it's open to the world. it's open to the world. But the gut microbiome, provided it's But the gut microbiome, provided it's But the gut microbiome, provided it's healthy, provides an incredible ability to heal provides an incredible ability to heal provides an incredible ability to heal quickly. And you know, I'm not somebody who's And you know, I'm not somebody who's And you know, I'm not somebody who's done a lot of acupuncture. I've went a done a lot of acupuncture. I've went a done a lot of acupuncture. I've went a few times and now there's interesting few times and now there's interesting few times and now there's interesting science happening on acupuncture, but science happening on acupuncture, but science happening on acupuncture, but what's the first thing they do when you what's the first thing they do when you what's the first thing they do when you walk in there? Mhm. Come on. walk in there? Mhm. Come on. walk in there? Mhm. Come on. And then they go, "Oh, yeah." And they And then they go, "Oh, yeah." And they And then they go, "Oh, yeah." And they have this cool intuition that's not have this cool intuition that's not have this cool intuition that's not based on Western mechanistic science. based on Western mechanistic science. based on Western mechanistic science. It's more of an intuition based on It's more of an intuition based on It's more of an intuition based on millions, if not billions, of data millions, if not billions, of data millions, if not billions, of data points that have been put into these points that have been put into these points that have been put into these charts. It's pretty cool, right? And charts. It's pretty cool, right? And charts. It's pretty cool, right? And what they are looking at, I believe, and what they are looking at, I believe, and what they are looking at, I believe, and from what my colleagues who work on from what my colleagues who work on from what my colleagues who work on microbiome tell me is they can look at microbiome tell me is they can look at microbiome tell me is they can look at the pallor of your tongue, in particular the pallor of your tongue, in particular the pallor of your tongue, in particular in the back, and get a sense of whether in the back, and get a sense of whether in the back, and get a sense of whether or not the microbiome there is or not the microbiome there is or not the microbiome there is of the appropriate of the appropriate of the appropriate stuff. But they don't go, "Oh, stuff. But they don't go, "Oh, stuff. But they don't go, "Oh, lactobacillus and then bacillus and they all end in and then bacillus and they all end in and then bacillus and they all end in -illus, right?" -illus, right?" -illus, right?" But they go, "Oh, you're dysbiotic." But they go, "Oh, you're dysbiotic." But they go, "Oh, you're dysbiotic." Instead, they get a sense. Now, parents Instead, they get a sense. Now, parents Instead, they get a sense. Now, parents of small babies learn to detect all of small babies learn to detect all of small babies learn to detect all sorts of things coming out of sorts of things coming out of sorts of things coming out of essentially every orifice of the child essentially every orifice of the child essentially every orifice of the child as a read out of health because the as a read out of health because the as a read out of health because the child doesn't have language. And a dog child doesn't have language. And a dog child doesn't have language. And a dog owners, you know, unfortunately learn to owners, you know, unfortunately learn to owners, you know, unfortunately learn to do this, too. do this, too. do this, too. For better or for worse, probably for For better or for worse, probably for For better or for worse, probably for better, right? So, we have this better, right? So, we have this better, right? So, we have this intuition about gut health, but gut intuition about gut health, but gut intuition about gut health, but gut health would be another example where health would be another example where health would be another example where it's very clear now that fiber can be it's very clear now that fiber can be it's very clear now that fiber can be helpful, but it's mostly consuming these helpful, but it's mostly consuming these helpful, but it's mostly consuming these fermented foods that have been used in fermented foods that have been used in fermented foods that have been used in for ages, but low-sugar fermented foods of ages, but low-sugar fermented foods of ages, but low-sugar fermented foods of the natto, kimchi, sauerkraut, kombucha, the natto, kimchi, sauerkraut, kombucha, the natto, kimchi, sauerkraut, kombucha, etc. Like all these things, etc. Like all these things, etc. Like all these things, de- depending on which culture you're de- depending on which culture you're de- depending on which culture you're in, they come in different forms, in, they come in different forms, in, they come in different forms, certain yogurts, etc., that allow the certain yogurts, etc., that allow the certain yogurts, etc., that allow the gut to be healthy and it modulates a gut to be healthy and it modulates a gut to be healthy and it modulates a huge number of systems. huge number of systems. huge number of systems. So, I don't think that you're going to So, I don't think that you're going to So, I don't think that you're going to cure depression by cure depression by cure depression by adjusting your gut microbiome, but if adjusting your gut microbiome, but if adjusting your gut microbiome, but if your gut microbiota are not well your gut microbiota are not well your gut microbiota are not well and you improve that, it will indeed and you improve that, it will indeed and you improve that, it will indeed shift the neurotransmitter systems of shift the neurotransmitter systems of shift the neurotransmitter systems of your brain and give you a elevated mood. your brain and give you a elevated mood. your brain and give you a elevated mood. That shouldn't come as a surprise That shouldn't come as a surprise That shouldn't come as a surprise anymore, but I think that the whole anymore, but I think that the whole anymore, but I think that the whole world thinks like, "Gosh, it must be the world thinks like, "Gosh, it must be the world thinks like, "Gosh, it must be the serotonin in the gut." No, it's actually serotonin in the gut." No, it's actually serotonin in the gut." No, it's actually not serotonin in the gut. It's that the not serotonin in the gut. It's that the not serotonin in the gut. It's that the It's gut microbiota create chemicals It's gut microbiota create chemicals It's gut microbiota create chemicals that actually become that actually become that actually become serotonin in the brain serotonin in the brain serotonin in the brain or become dopamine in the brain. or become dopamine in the brain. or become dopamine in the brain. And so, I think that the gut microbiome And so, I think that the gut microbiome And so, I think that the gut microbiome I would put in the same category, I would put in the same category, I would put in the same category, although not quite as important. I would although not quite as important. I would although not quite as important. I would put it in the category of like sleep. It put it in the category of like sleep. It put it in the category of like sleep. It modulates a huge number of other modulates a huge number of other modulates a huge number of other processes. It doesn't mediate them. processes. It doesn't mediate them. processes. It doesn't mediate them. So, sunlight, sleep, So, sunlight, sleep, So, sunlight, sleep, healthy gut microbiome, exercise, good healthy gut microbiome, exercise, good healthy gut microbiome, exercise, good nutrition, social connection, these nutrition, social connection, these nutrition, social connection, these things all create this general milieu or things all create this general milieu or things all create this general milieu or environment of health. environment of health. environment of health. I would like to see more distinction I would like to see more distinction I would like to see more distinction between modulating and mediating to between modulating and mediating to between modulating and mediating to effects and tools out there because I effects and tools out there because I effects and tools out there because I also see a lot of unnecessary argument. also see a lot of unnecessary argument. also see a lot of unnecessary argument. People are like, "There's no example People are like, "There's no example People are like, "There's no example that improving your gut microbiome cures that improving your gut microbiome cures that improving your gut microbiome cures depressions." Of course there's not, but depressions." Of course there's not, but depressions." Of course there's not, but there are really good examples if your there are really good examples if your there are really good examples if your gut microbiome is off that improving it gut microbiome is off that improving it gut microbiome is off that improving it can improve mood, which in depending on can improve mood, which in depending on can improve mood, which in depending on where you are on that spectrum of where you are on that spectrum of where you are on that spectrum of depression can really relieve things. depression can really relieve things. depression can really relieve things. So, I think that the future of So, I think that the future of So, I think that the future of health, you know, we hear so much about health, you know, we hear so much about health, you know, we hear so much about personalized medicine and matched to personalized medicine and matched to personalized medicine and matched to your genome, but we don't even have the your genome, but we don't even have the your genome, but we don't even have the basic Most people don't even have the basic Most people don't even have the basic Most people don't even have the basics right. And if you watch or listen basics right. And if you watch or listen basics right. And if you watch or listen to the podcast long enough, hopefully to the podcast long enough, hopefully to the podcast long enough, hopefully certain themes start to kind of repeat certain themes start to kind of repeat certain themes start to kind of repeat themselves. But a key theme that uh you themselves. But a key theme that uh you themselves. But a key theme that uh you learn in science, you teach your learn in science, you teach your learn in science, you teach your students, you know, let's Does it students, you know, let's Does it students, you know, let's Does it modulate it or does it mediate it? You modulate it or does it mediate it? You modulate it or does it mediate it? You need to be careful with your language need to be careful with your language need to be careful with your language there. And there's great information and or as And there's great information and or as And there's great information and or as we say interpretational power there we say interpretational power there we say interpretational power there if you understand the difference, then I if you understand the difference, then I if you understand the difference, then I think we can go a long way think we can go a long way think we can go a long way by making that distinction modulating by making that distinction modulating by making that distinction modulating versus mediating. Uh there probably versus mediating. Uh there probably versus mediating. Uh there probably other things that modulate health that other things that modulate health that other things that modulate health that I'm overlooking now just because of the I'm overlooking now just because of the I'm overlooking now just because of the flow that I'm in. the flow that I'm in. the flow that I'm in. The cool mitt. Yeah. The cool mitt. Yeah. The cool mitt. Yeah. The cool mitt, palmer cooling. The cool mitt, palmer cooling. The cool mitt, palmer cooling. Okay, I promise to talk about palmer Okay, I promise to talk about palmer Okay, I promise to talk about palmer cooling. Well, I'll do it now. Palmer cooling. Well, I'll do it now. Palmer cooling. Well, I'll do it now. Palmer cooling, they changed the Q&amp;A format. cooling, they changed the Q&amp;A format. cooling, they changed the Q&amp;A format. What can I say? This is like teaching in What can I say? This is like teaching in What can I say? This is like teaching in the classroom. the classroom. the classroom. All right, very briefly All right, very briefly All right, very briefly the palmer cooling, which is essentially the palmer cooling, which is essentially the palmer cooling, which is essentially placing you can placing you can placing you can cool the core of the body most quickly cool the core of the body most quickly cool the core of the body most quickly by placing cold objects on the hands, by placing cold objects on the hands, by placing cold objects on the hands, the bottoms of the feet, or on the top the bottoms of the feet, or on the top the bottoms of the feet, or on the top of the face because of the arrangement of the face because of the arrangement of the face because of the arrangement of vasculature. Normally, you got this of vasculature. Normally, you got this of vasculature. Normally, you got this arteries, capillaries, veins things, but arteries, capillaries, veins things, but arteries, capillaries, veins things, but in at those locations in the body, you in at those locations in the body, you in at those locations in the body, you skip the capillaries and you can skip the capillaries and you can skip the capillaries and you can basically you're not really passing cool basically you're not really passing cool basically you're not really passing cool into the body, but you're cooling off into the body, but you're cooling off into the body, but you're cooling off the core of the body more quickly. And the core of the body more quickly. And the core of the body more quickly. And if you do that in between sets of if you do that in between sets of if you do that in between sets of exercise or during a run or cycling, you exercise or during a run or cycling, you exercise or during a run or cycling, you can dramatically increase your ability can dramatically increase your ability can dramatically increase your ability to continue. I actually use the cool to continue. I actually use the cool to continue. I actually use the cool mitt for cognitive work. But you don't mitt for cognitive work. But you don't mitt for cognitive work. But you don't need a cool mitt. Sorry cool mitt guys. need a cool mitt. Sorry cool mitt guys. need a cool mitt. Sorry cool mitt guys. Um you can just get a Um you can just get a Um you can just get a thing of ice water or just very cold a thing of ice water or just very cold a thing of ice water or just very cold water and you I know it sounds trivially water and you I know it sounds trivially water and you I know it sounds trivially easy, but you're actually just easy, but you're actually just easy, but you're actually just cooling your core by putting your hands cooling your core by putting your hands cooling your core by putting your hands or even one hand on a relatively cold or even one hand on a relatively cold or even one hand on a relatively cold thing of water or ice, but not so cold thing of water or ice, but not so cold thing of water or ice, but not so cold that it constricts the vasculature that it constricts the vasculature that it constricts the vasculature there. This is the incredible work of my there. This is the incredible work of my there. This is the incredible work of my colleague at Stanford Dr. Craig Heller. colleague at Stanford Dr. Craig Heller. colleague at Stanford Dr. Craig Heller. Why wouldn't more people do this if you Why wouldn't more people do this if you Why wouldn't more people do this if you can double the amount of endurance, can double the amount of endurance, can double the amount of endurance, believe it or not, or double the number believe it or not, or double the number believe it or not, or double the number of sets of exercise you can do or feel of sets of exercise you can do or feel of sets of exercise you can do or feel more alert and do more cognitive work? more alert and do more cognitive work? more alert and do more cognitive work? Why wouldn't more people do it? Because Why wouldn't more people do it? Because Why wouldn't more people do it? Because people just don't do it and it sounds people just don't do it and it sounds people just don't do it and it sounds crazy. It really sounds crazy, but it's a real It really sounds crazy, but it's a real It really sounds crazy, but it's a real thing, and I wish more people would do thing, and I wish more people would do thing, and I wish more people would do it. The athletes at Stanford do it, it. The athletes at Stanford do it, it. The athletes at Stanford do it, people in the military do it. So, people in the military do it. So, people in the military do it. So, people who know, and they and they use it who know, and they and they use it who know, and they and they use it and enjoy it. It's just it's a and enjoy it. It's just it's a and enjoy it. It's just it's a it's a it's almost like it's a it's almost like it's a it's almost like seems too off target from the what seems too off target from the what seems too off target from the what you're trying to accomplish. I don't you're trying to accomplish. I don't you're trying to accomplish. I don't know, for some reason people are finally know, for some reason people are finally know, for some reason people are finally on board breathing on board breathing on board breathing like in a specific way as a useful tool. like in a specific way as a useful tool. like in a specific way as a useful tool. A few years ago, no one was into that. A few years ago, no one was into that. A few years ago, no one was into that. Um and just think of how far we've come. Um and just think of how far we've come. Um and just think of how far we've come. It's incredible. So, people are talking It's incredible. So, people are talking It's incredible. So, people are talking about psychedelics, meditation, about psychedelics, meditation, about psychedelics, meditation, breathing. I think the pandemic breathing. I think the pandemic breathing. I think the pandemic for all its pains and, you know, what a for all its pains and, you know, what a for all its pains and, you know, what a challenging period for all sorts of challenging period for all sorts of challenging period for all sorts of reasons, did wake people up to the idea reasons, did wake people up to the idea reasons, did wake people up to the idea that you have to take control over your that you have to take control over your that you have to take control over your health because there's no magic fairy health because there's no magic fairy health because there's no magic fairy coming to do it for you. And with all coming to do it for you. And with all coming to do it for you. And with all due respect, there's no government due respect, there's no government due respect, there's no government agency that's going to like drop off the agency that's going to like drop off the agency that's going to like drop off the kit at your front door of like, "Here's kit at your front door of like, "Here's kit at your front door of like, "Here's how you take good care of yourself." So, how you take good care of yourself." So, how you take good care of yourself." So, it's just it's just not going to happen. it's just it's just not going to happen. it's just it's just not going to happen. And it wouldn't happen under any And it wouldn't happen under any And it wouldn't happen under any circumstances. So, it's a personal circumstances. So, it's a personal circumstances. So, it's a personal responsibility issue. responsibility issue. responsibility issue. All right. All right. All right. What lessons from skateboarding? The What lessons from skateboarding? The What lessons from skateboarding? The failure part. failure part. failure part. You know, the failure, failure. You know, the failure, failure. You know, the failure, failure. I mean, for me I mean, for me I mean, for me um you know, skateboard never was a good um you know, skateboard never was a good um you know, skateboard never was a good skateboarder. Still have close friends skateboarder. Still have close friends skateboarder. Still have close friends in that community and um our in that community and um our in that community and um our photographer and the guy who does all photographer and the guy who does all photographer and the guy who does all the visuals and the other guys do the visuals and the other guys do the visuals and the other guys do the visuals for our podcast, Mike visuals for our podcast, Mike visuals for our podcast, Mike Playbacking. Chris and Martin are all of that Chris and Martin are all of that Chris and Martin are all of that community. You know, I think that for me community. You know, I think that for me community. You know, I think that for me that community was really um as a that community was really um as a that community was really um as a Michael sometimes say, "Skateboarders Michael sometimes say, "Skateboarders Michael sometimes say, "Skateboarders hate everything." hate everything." hate everything." Um meaning they have a very high Um meaning they have a very high Um meaning they have a very high threshold for what they consider threshold for what they consider threshold for what they consider acceptable. It's not just what you do, acceptable. It's not just what you do, acceptable. It's not just what you do, it's how you do it. Super important. And it's how you do it. Super important. And it's how you do it. Super important. And I think in neuroscience um there are a I think in neuroscience um there are a I think in neuroscience um there are a lot of there's a lot of stuff. In lot of there's a lot of stuff. In lot of there's a lot of stuff. In science in general, there are a lot science in general, there are a lot science in general, there are a lot there's so many papers and there's so there's so many papers and there's so there's so many papers and there's so many experiments. Like, how do you many experiments. Like, how do you many experiments. Like, how do you navigate that landscape? I think it navigate that landscape? I think it navigate that landscape? I think it helped me develop a sense of taste. But helped me develop a sense of taste. But helped me develop a sense of taste. But the taste that I'm referring to is was the taste that I'm referring to is was the taste that I'm referring to is was necessarily a taste of which science is necessarily a taste of which science is necessarily a taste of which science is cooler not cool that too but it came cooler not cool that too but it came cooler not cool that too but it came through a few times tonight when I was through a few times tonight when I was through a few times tonight when I was talking about my mentors. You know, I talking about my mentors. You know, I talking about my mentors. You know, I picked back then skateboarding because I picked back then skateboarding because I picked back then skateboarding because I really liked the people. really liked the people. really liked the people. And also you didn't need your parents to And also you didn't need your parents to And also you didn't need your parents to go to a game and so that worked for me. go to a game and so that worked for me. go to a game and so that worked for me. Um and you could Um and you could Um and you could kind of make your own schedule. And I do kind of make your own schedule. And I do kind of make your own schedule. And I do think it's very important to the extent think it's very important to the extent think it's very important to the extent that you can that you can that you can in science and in everything to surround in science and in everything to surround in science and in everything to surround yourself with the kinds of people that yourself with the kinds of people that yourself with the kinds of people that you just really enjoy being around. And you just really enjoy being around. And you just really enjoy being around. And so to me so to me so to me the podcast running a lab feels a lot the podcast running a lab feels a lot the podcast running a lab feels a lot like skateboarding. It's the same like skateboarding. It's the same like skateboarding. It's the same energy. It's the same neurochemical energy. It's the same neurochemical energy. It's the same neurochemical systems firing. So that that's uh yeah, systems firing. So that that's uh yeah, systems firing. So that that's uh yeah, that one. Next that one. Next that one. Next favorite fine Oh. Oh wait, no, that's favorite fine Oh. Oh wait, no, that's favorite fine Oh. Oh wait, no, that's inappropriate. Um inappropriate. Um inappropriate. Um I do have a Feynman story um but it's I do have a Feynman story um but it's I do have a Feynman story um but it's inappropriate. Um darn it. inappropriate. Um darn it. inappropriate. Um darn it. Maybe sometime. This is why I don't Maybe sometime. This is why I don't Maybe sometime. This is why I don't drink. Um good decision-making. Well, I read all of Feynman's books. So Well, I read all of Feynman's books. So Well, I read all of Feynman's books. So I had the pleasure I never met him. Uh I had the pleasure I never met him. Uh I had the pleasure I never met him. Uh he was dead before he was dead before he was dead before I was born. I was born. I was born. Um but my dad did and he had good but my dad did and he had good but my dad did and he had good Feynman stories and they're Feynman stories and they're Feynman stories and they're inappropriate. Um inappropriate. Um inappropriate. Um so the cool thing about Feynman, right? Was the cool thing about Feynman, right? Was the cool thing about Feynman, right? Was that um that um that um he didn't really care he didn't really care he didn't really care if people understood if people understood if people understood the specifics of what he was talking the specifics of what he was talking the specifics of what he was talking about. He just wanted people to get about. He just wanted people to get about. He just wanted people to get turned on to how amazing physics was. turned on to how amazing physics was. turned on to how amazing physics was. And he loved general principles and And he loved general principles and And he loved general principles and one of the things you know, the example one of the things you know, the example one of the things you know, the example that sometimes given I don't know how that sometimes given I don't know how that sometimes given I don't know how many of you are familiar with the many of you are familiar with the many of you are familiar with the Feynman books but surely you're joking Feynman books but surely you're joking Feynman books but surely you're joking Mr. Feynman or what do you care what Mr. Feynman or what do you care what Mr. Feynman or what do you care what other people think all of that stuff. other people think all of that stuff. other people think all of that stuff. It's wonderful. He picked locks. You It's wonderful. He picked locks. You It's wonderful. He picked locks. You know, when he worked at Los Alamos Labs know, when he worked at Los Alamos Labs know, when he worked at Los Alamos Labs they were working on the bomb and he they were working on the bomb and he they were working on the bomb and he basically well there and elsewhere and basically well there and elsewhere and basically well there and elsewhere and every morning the offices used to come every morning the offices used to come every morning the offices used to come in and he would spread all the top in and he would spread all the top in and he would spread all the top secret papers out on the floor. He would secret papers out on the floor. He would secret papers out on the floor. He would break into the safes at night and then break into the safes at night and then break into the safes at night and then they were perplexed who could do this they were perplexed who could do this they were perplexed who could do this and he like safe cracking. Literally and he like safe cracking. Literally and he like safe cracking. Literally like national security secrets just for like national security secrets just for like national security secrets just for fun. Prankster. He also bongo drum naked fun. Prankster. He also bongo drum naked fun. Prankster. He also bongo drum naked on the roof of Caltech. And he did most on the roof of Caltech. And he did most on the roof of Caltech. And he did most of his writing of theorems in strip of his writing of theorems in strip of his writing of theorems in strip clubs. Fact. Learned to draw late in life. Was really Learned to draw late in life. Was really Learned to draw late in life. Was really into flotation tanks. into flotation tanks. into flotation tanks. Um and very curious about but never did Um and very curious about but never did Um and very curious about but never did psychedelics. That's as I understand. But one of the That's as I understand. But one of the That's as I understand. But one of the cool Feynman factoids is that when the cool Feynman factoids is that when the cool Feynman factoids is that when he was a kid he talked about when he was a kid he talked about when he was a kid he talked about when he was a child that his dad used to take was a child that his dad used to take was a child that his dad used to take him bird watching. And he'd say, "Well, him bird watching. And he'd say, "Well, him bird watching. And he'd say, "Well, that's a whatever scrub jay and that's a that's a whatever scrub jay and that's a that's a whatever scrub jay and that's a whatever thrush and that's the whatever thrush and that's the whatever thrush and that's the and his dad said, "No. and his dad said, "No. and his dad said, "No. Don't cloud your mind with naming and Don't cloud your mind with naming and Don't cloud your mind with naming and taxonomy. That's not meaningful because then what That's not meaningful because then what That's not meaningful because then what if it's the different, you know, the if it's the different, you know, the if it's the different, you know, the pygmy thrush or the lesser this or pygmy thrush or the lesser this or pygmy thrush or the lesser this or that. The more important thing is to start to The more important thing is to start to The more important thing is to start to identify principles of identify principles of identify principles of why certain birds why certain birds why certain birds behave one way and certain birds behave one way and certain birds behave one way and certain birds behave another and to start finding the another and to start finding the another and to start finding the commonalities and the regularities. commonalities and the regularities. commonalities and the regularities. And that's a theme that I obviously And that's a theme that I obviously And that's a theme that I obviously tonight have tried to impose and it's tonight have tried to impose and it's tonight have tried to impose and it's actually something that I can't do in actually something that I can't do in actually something that I can't do in podcast necessarily cuz I can't thread podcast necessarily cuz I can't thread podcast necessarily cuz I can't thread across 40 episodes or something like across 40 episodes or something like across 40 episodes or something like that in the same way that I could in an that in the same way that I could in an that in the same way that I could in an evening like this. So, evening like this. So, evening like this. So, that's an appropriate Feynman story. Um that's an appropriate Feynman story. Um that's an appropriate Feynman story. Um also it just seemed like a delightful also it just seemed like a delightful also it just seemed like a delightful guy and he's kind of cool. He's a little guy and he's kind of cool. He's a little guy and he's kind of cool. He's a little bit street, right? He had that thick bit street, right? He had that thick bit street, right? He had that thick accent. He was from Far Rockaway but he accent. He was from Far Rockaway but he accent. He was from Far Rockaway but he didn't really care much what people didn't really care much what people didn't really care much what people thought or he did and he pretended he thought or he did and he pretended he thought or he did and he pretended he didn't. Careful when people tell you didn't. Careful when people tell you didn't. Careful when people tell you they don't care what people think. I they don't care what people think. I they don't care what people think. I think um he did to the extent that it think um he did to the extent that it think um he did to the extent that it still allowed him to get the message out still allowed him to get the message out still allowed him to get the message out there. Okay. Next question, please. Next question, please. Next question, please. My horse. My horse. My horse. Wow. I love this. I delight in all things I love this. I delight in all things I love this. I delight in all things animals, but especially horses because animals, but especially horses because animals, but especially horses because my high school girlfriend had a horse my high school girlfriend had a horse my high school girlfriend had a horse and um and um and um I you know, they do that thing where I you know, they do that thing where I you know, they do that thing where people go, "Oh, you know, horses can people go, "Oh, you know, horses can people go, "Oh, you know, horses can detect how they know more about you than detect how they know more about you than detect how they know more about you than you know." And then I get into the horse you know." And then I get into the horse you know." And then I get into the horse and the horse is like, you know, you do and the horse is like, you know, you do and the horse is like, you know, you do this and like it's like a litmus test. this and like it's like a litmus test. this and like it's like a litmus test. Having a girlfriend with a horse was Having a girlfriend with a horse was Having a girlfriend with a horse was very intimidating for me, actually. I very intimidating for me, actually. I very intimidating for me, actually. I felt like I had to compete with the felt like I had to compete with the felt like I had to compete with the horse. She spent all this time with the horse. She spent all this time with the horse. She spent all this time with the horse. He's very large, very like, you know. He's very large, very like, you know. He's very large, very like, you know. Um Anyway, eventually I broke the horse. The um eventually I broke the horse. The um eventually I broke the horse. The um okay, my horse does the double inhale okay, my horse does the double inhale okay, my horse does the double inhale long exhale often. He's a bit of a long exhale often. He's a bit of a long exhale often. He's a bit of a stressy guy, warm blood. Yeah? Warm stressy guy, warm blood. Yeah? Warm stressy guy, warm blood. Yeah? Warm blood. Um I used to work at the barn. blood. Um I used to work at the barn. blood. Um I used to work at the barn. Yeah. Uh I used to shovel manure and work at Uh I used to shovel manure and work at Uh I used to shovel manure and work at the barn. She brought her horse to the barn. She brought her horse to the barn. She brought her horse to college. That's how I actually followed college. That's how I actually followed college. That's how I actually followed her off to college. I never would have her off to college. I never would have her off to college. I never would have gone to college if she hadn't gone to gone to college if she hadn't gone to gone to college if she hadn't gone to college. Um and the horses are interesting animals. They the horses are interesting animals. They the horses are interesting animals. They do tell you a lot. They The horse does do tell you a lot. They The horse does do tell you a lot. They The horse does the double inhale long exhale often. the double inhale long exhale often. the double inhale long exhale often. He's a bit of a stressy guy. Do you He's a bit of a stressy guy. Do you He's a bit of a stressy guy. Do you suppose this physiological stress suppose this physiological stress suppose this physiological stress regulator transcends me? Absolutely. regulator transcends me? Absolutely. regulator transcends me? Absolutely. In fact, I mentioned warm Absolutely. In fact, I mentioned warm Absolutely. In fact, I mentioned warm bloods, right? I have a colleague at bloods, right? I have a colleague at bloods, right? I have a colleague at Stanford. Uh she's amazing. Uh her name is Sue Uh she's amazing. Uh her name is Sue Uh she's amazing. Uh her name is Sue McConnell and she McConnell and she McConnell and she is an expert in dog genetics. So, you is an expert in dog genetics. So, you is an expert in dog genetics. So, you can imagine I'm always asking her can imagine I'm always asking her can imagine I'm always asking her questions. Um and we talk about dogs and we talk Um and we talk about dogs and we talk Um and we talk about dogs and we talk about horses because she also I think about horses because she also I think about horses because she also I think she raises warm bloods. she raises warm bloods. she raises warm bloods. And you hear about hot bloods and warm And you hear about hot bloods and warm And you hear about hot bloods and warm bloods and you also, if you have any bloods and you also, if you have any bloods and you also, if you have any familiarity with dogs, there are dogs familiarity with dogs, there are dogs familiarity with dogs, there are dogs like Costello where like a nuclear bomb like Costello where like a nuclear bomb like Costello where like a nuclear bomb could go off and Costello might open an could go off and Costello might open an could go off and Costello might open an eye. That's the bulldog, economy of effort. That's the bulldog, economy of effort. That's the bulldog, economy of effort. They're not going to get activated They're not going to get activated They're not going to get activated unless there's a reason to do it. They unless there's a reason to do it. They unless there's a reason to do it. They are very, as we call, parasympathetic are very, as we call, parasympathetic are very, as we call, parasympathetic dominant. That seesaw of autonomic arousal is just That seesaw of autonomic arousal is just That seesaw of autonomic arousal is just really, really relaxed. Getting them really, really relaxed. Getting them really, really relaxed. Getting them into action is more of a into action is more of a into action is more of a more of an effort. more of an effort. more of an effort. There are other animals There are other animals There are other animals like the whippet, like the whippet, like the whippet, right? Or the Italian greyhound. right? Or the Italian greyhound. right? Or the Italian greyhound. Like they those like they're always cold Like they those like they're always cold Like they those like they're always cold that are very sympathetic dominant. that are very sympathetic dominant. that are very sympathetic dominant. And then of course within a breeder or And then of course within a breeder or And then of course within a breeder or within a species there's a range. within a species there's a range. within a species there's a range. And humans also And humans also And humans also about within a range. I think anyone about within a range. I think anyone about within a range. I think anyone who's had children will tell you, you who's had children will tell you, you who's had children will tell you, you know, he or she has been like this since know, he or she has been like this since know, he or she has been like this since birth. Calm, easy-going, or like really birth. Calm, easy-going, or like really birth. Calm, easy-going, or like really easily stressed. I think that seesaw easily stressed. I think that seesaw easily stressed. I think that seesaw we didn't get into tonight too much, but we didn't get into tonight too much, but we didn't get into tonight too much, but there's a concept with the autonomic there's a concept with the autonomic there's a concept with the autonomic regulation of a hinge. So don't think regulation of a hinge. So don't think regulation of a hinge. So don't think so much about being really stressed out so much about being really stressed out so much about being really stressed out or really relaxed, but certain animals or really relaxed, but certain animals or really relaxed, but certain animals the hinge is tightened so that the hinge is tightened so that the hinge is tightened so that the seesaw just kind of tilts mellow, the seesaw just kind of tilts mellow, the seesaw just kind of tilts mellow, like Costello. A bulldog is almost seems like Costello. A bulldog is almost seems like Costello. A bulldog is almost seems like a different animal like a different animal like a different animal than a whippet. than a whippet. than a whippet. They're so very different. And within They're so very different. And within They're so very different. And within the category horses, and I'm not an the category horses, and I'm not an the category horses, and I'm not an expert in horse genetics, but they are expert in horse genetics, but they are expert in horse genetics, but they are selected for not just for their physical selected for not just for their physical selected for not just for their physical attributes, but for their but for their but for their psychological or temperament attributes. psychological or temperament attributes. psychological or temperament attributes. And you see this in dogs, too. In fact, And you see this in dogs, too. In fact, And you see this in dogs, too. In fact, the reason I picked Costello, and Elvis the reason I picked Costello, and Elvis the reason I picked Costello, and Elvis can verify the story, is I read I wanted can verify the story, is I read I wanted can verify the story, is I read I wanted a dog for so many years, and I went a dog for so many years, and I went a dog for so many years, and I went there, and there were all these puppies, there, and there were all these puppies, there, and there were all these puppies, and I was and I was and I was I heard you need to take them in the I heard you need to take them in the I heard you need to take them in the other room and one by one and then if it other room and one by one and then if it other room and one by one and then if it barks for its siblings and you're like, barks for its siblings and you're like, barks for its siblings and you're like, "Oh, it's a healthy puppy." So I walk in "Oh, it's a healthy puppy." So I walk in "Oh, it's a healthy puppy." So I walk in and all the dogs are running around like and all the dogs are running around like and all the dogs are running around like crazy. It was right around Christmas crazy. It was right around Christmas crazy. It was right around Christmas time, right, Elvis? And they're running time, right, Elvis? And they're running time, right, Elvis? And they're running around and then there's one in the back, around and then there's one in the back, around and then there's one in the back, and he's taking advantage of the fact and he's taking advantage of the fact and he's taking advantage of the fact that all the ones are away and he's that all the ones are away and he's that all the ones are away and he's just eating out of all of their bowls. just eating out of all of their bowls. just eating out of all of their bowls. And I was like, I want that one. And I was like, I want that one. And I was like, I want that one. So, I took that chubby little bastard in So, I took that chubby little bastard in So, I took that chubby little bastard in the next room and I thought, "Okay, he's the next room and I thought, "Okay, he's the next room and I thought, "Okay, he's going to bark for his siblings." going to bark for his siblings." going to bark for his siblings." And he laid down and he took a nap. And he laid down and he took a nap. And he laid down and he took a nap. And I was like, "This one. I want this And I was like, "This one. I want this And I was like, "This one. I want this one." Why did I want that one? Well, this Why did I want that one? Well, this Why did I want that one? Well, this completes the completes the completes the principle, which is I wanted a dog the principle, which is I wanted a dog the principle, which is I wanted a dog like that because I'm not like that. like that because I'm not like that. like that because I'm not like that. And I'm very was very interested in a And I'm very was very interested in a And I'm very was very interested in a dog I could take care of, but also a dog I could take care of, but also a dog I could take care of, but also a dog that would help regulate my nervous that would help regulate my nervous that would help regulate my nervous system. And so, for me, having a dog like that And so, for me, having a dog like that And so, for me, having a dog like that as opposed to a whippet or something as opposed to a whippet or something as opposed to a whippet or something that was going to, you know, like that was going to, you know, like that was going to, you know, like constantly around is going, you know, constantly around is going, you know, constantly around is going, you know, have a very calming effect. And it to have a very calming effect. And it to have a very calming effect. And it to this day, memory of his snoring still this day, memory of his snoring still this day, memory of his snoring still puts me to sleep. So, I think that your puts me to sleep. So, I think that your puts me to sleep. So, I think that your horse probably has it kind of idles your horse probably has it kind of idles your horse probably has it kind of idles a little bit higher. Think about the a little bit higher. Think about the a little bit higher. Think about the RPM, you know, revs a little bit higher at a you know, revs a little bit higher at a you know, revs a little bit higher at a given speed. Higher more RPM at a given speed. Higher more RPM at a given speed. Higher more RPM at a given speed. That's the way I think about the speed. That's the way I think about the speed. That's the way I think about the autonomic system. How do you reset that? autonomic system. How do you reset that? autonomic system. How do you reset that? Well, this is why a lot of exercise is Well, this is why a lot of exercise is Well, this is why a lot of exercise is good, right? Incidentally, my good, right? Incidentally, my good, right? Incidentally, my girlfriend's horse was crazy. It was girlfriend's horse was crazy. It was girlfriend's horse was crazy. It was gelded late and it was crazy. gelded late and it was crazy. gelded late and it was crazy. I almost said nuts, but that that's like I almost said nuts, but that that's like I almost said nuts, but that that's like a bad pun, so, right? It was not nuts, a bad pun, so, right? It was not nuts, a bad pun, so, right? It was not nuts, but it was crazy. It was gelded late. Um but it was crazy. It was gelded late. Um but it was crazy. It was gelded late. Um Next question. Is there any science behind staying Is there any science behind staying Is there any science behind staying motivated or developing discipline? Ooh. motivated or developing discipline? Ooh. motivated or developing discipline? Ooh. So, this represents kind of the higher So, this represents kind of the higher So, this represents kind of the higher tier of where I think things are going tier of where I think things are going tier of where I think things are going to go in the next few years, where we're to go in the next few years, where we're to go in the next few years, where we're going to start seeing this going to start seeing this going to start seeing this convergence of psychology and biology, convergence of psychology and biology, convergence of psychology and biology, where we can get to these harder where we can get to these harder where we can get to these harder concepts. You know, You know, You know, I like to think that we can stay I like to think that we can stay I like to think that we can stay motivated through motivated through motivated through a simple process that now will make a simple process that now will make a simple process that now will make sense to you because the last thing I sense to you because the last thing I sense to you because the last thing I covered was toggling back and forth covered was toggling back and forth covered was toggling back and forth between our ability to be gritty and lean in, our ability to be gritty and lean in, our ability to be gritty and lean in, kind of in friction, maybe even a little kind of in friction, maybe even a little kind of in friction, maybe even a little anger, fear, competitiveness, etc., that anger, fear, competitiveness, etc., that anger, fear, competitiveness, etc., that kind of uh kind of uh kind of uh grinding in, but that the more grinding in, but that the more grinding in, but that the more sustaining fuel sustaining fuel sustaining fuel the sort of hybrid the sort of hybrid the sort of hybrid version, right? version, right? version, right? Hybrid fuel model would be one in which Hybrid fuel model would be one in which Hybrid fuel model would be one in which you can access that, but that's a you can access that, but that's a you can access that, but that's a depletable and not so renewable resource depletable and not so renewable resource depletable and not so renewable resource without a lot of rest. Meaning, working without a lot of rest. Meaning, working without a lot of rest. Meaning, working hard out of anger, determination, and hard out of anger, determination, and hard out of anger, determination, and kind of grit will work, but when you kind of grit will work, but when you kind of grit will work, but when you are depleted are depleted are depleted you have to stop for a long while. you have to stop for a long while. you have to stop for a long while. Whereas, if you can access this delight Whereas, if you can access this delight Whereas, if you can access this delight system, which is really one of dopamine system, which is really one of dopamine system, which is really one of dopamine and serotonin both. In other words, and serotonin both. In other words, and serotonin both. In other words, and I want to think of a not of a different I want to think of a not of a different I want to think of a not of a different way to put this, but to try and think way to put this, but to try and think way to put this, but to try and think about what sorts of things and tools about what sorts of things and tools about what sorts of things and tools allow you to be allow you to be allow you to be and feel most loving. I know and feel most loving. I know and feel most loving. I know it sounds it sounds it sounds weak, but it's anything but weak. To be weak, but it's anything but weak. To be weak, but it's anything but weak. To be most loving in the verb sense of the most loving in the verb sense of the most loving in the verb sense of the word toward what you're doing. I word toward what you're doing. I word toward what you're doing. I actually used to use this trick in actually used to use this trick in actually used to use this trick in college when I'd encounter a topic I college when I'd encounter a topic I college when I'd encounter a topic I hated. I would tell myself I would tell myself I would tell myself I'm really I'm just going to fall in I'm really I'm just going to fall in I'm really I'm just going to fall in love with this love with this love with this by trying to find the gems within it. by trying to find the gems within it. by trying to find the gems within it. Sometimes it worked, sometimes it Sometimes it worked, sometimes it Sometimes it worked, sometimes it didn't, but the wish to do it that way didn't, but the wish to do it that way didn't, but the wish to do it that way as opposed to okay, I'm just going to as opposed to okay, I'm just going to as opposed to okay, I'm just going to grind this out. At least for me at the grind this out. At least for me at the grind this out. At least for me at the time was a powerful tool. So, motivation time was a powerful tool. So, motivation time was a powerful tool. So, motivation and discipline is a tricky one. and discipline is a tricky one. and discipline is a tricky one. That's sort of the just do it thing. That's sort of the just do it thing. That's sort of the just do it thing. Um, you need tools to modulate your stress you need tools to modulate your stress you need tools to modulate your stress and to and to and to get your sleep, you know, do all the get your sleep, you know, do all the get your sleep, you know, do all the basic things right. Set the right basic things right. Set the right basic things right. Set the right context for you to be in your best context for you to be in your best context for you to be in your best chance of being disciplined. chance of being disciplined. chance of being disciplined. And that it's itself is its own form of And that it's itself is its own form of And that it's itself is its own form of discipline, but in terms of continual discipline, but in terms of continual discipline, but in terms of continual motivation you're not going to manage you're not going to manage you're not going to manage to go against the grain for very long. to go against the grain for very long. to go against the grain for very long. Um, people have managed to go against Um, people have managed to go against Um, people have managed to go against challenge for very long time for very challenge for very long time for very challenge for very long time for very long times. In fact, I was reading long times. In fact, I was reading long times. In fact, I was reading recently about the psychology of people recently about the psychology of people recently about the psychology of people who've been kidnapped who've been kidnapped who've been kidnapped and they have this odd trick that they and they have this odd trick that they and they have this odd trick that they use. Have you heard about this? It's use. Have you heard about this? It's use. Have you heard about this? It's sort of like Stockholm syndrome, but sort of like Stockholm syndrome, but sort of like Stockholm syndrome, but they actually convince themselves to they actually convince themselves to they actually convince themselves to fall in love with their captors. fall in love with their captors. fall in love with their captors. And then they come up with new ways to And then they come up with new ways to And then they come up with new ways to escape them. Which is kind of cool. escape them. Which is kind of cool. escape them. Which is kind of cool. Um so there's something about Um so there's something about Um so there's something about mentally feeling like you're trying to mentally feeling like you're trying to mentally feeling like you're trying to go from back on your heels to go from back on your heels to go from back on your heels to flat-footed that does that's very flat-footed that does that's very flat-footed that does that's very energetically costly. energetically costly. energetically costly. So again, the these systems are very So again, the these systems are very So again, the these systems are very susceptible to susceptible to susceptible to the what we call context or top-down the what we call context or top-down the what we call context or top-down regulation. Hopefully, that helps. I regulation. Hopefully, that helps. I regulation. Hopefully, that helps. I know it's a little bit abstract. I wish know it's a little bit abstract. I wish know it's a little bit abstract. I wish I could give you a 1-minute exercise I could give you a 1-minute exercise I could give you a 1-minute exercise that would make you motivated, but um that would make you motivated, but um that would make you motivated, but um but we do talk about tools like to get but we do talk about tools like to get but we do talk about tools like to get adrenaline going and things like that. adrenaline going and things like that. adrenaline going and things like that. But spend some time thinking about what But spend some time thinking about what But spend some time thinking about what would allow you to sustain effort would allow you to sustain effort would allow you to sustain effort through positive feelings. It's not a through positive feelings. It's not a through positive feelings. It's not a light concept light concept light concept at all. at all. at all. Okay. Next question, please. What would Okay. Next question, please. What would Okay. Next question, please. What would be your biggest piece of advice for be your biggest piece of advice for be your biggest piece of advice for achieving one's dreams? Oy. achieving one's dreams? Oy. achieving one's dreams? Oy. That's a tough one. That's a tough one. That's a tough one. Um Again, this is going to be a little Again, this is going to be a little Again, this is going to be a little abstract. You know, You know, You know, I'm a believer in this idea of a kind of I'm a believer in this idea of a kind of I'm a believer in this idea of a kind of a seed message. a seed message. a seed message. Um Robert Greene has talked a lot about Robert Greene has talked a lot about Robert Greene has talked a lot about this. Um that we can all kind of think back to Um that we can all kind of think back to Um that we can all kind of think back to a event or stage of our life. Typically, event or stage of our life. Typically, event or stage of our life. Typically, it's um before puberty um before puberty um before puberty for other reasons that are kind of for other reasons that are kind of for other reasons that are kind of interesting, but where we delight in interesting, but where we delight in interesting, but where we delight in something, right? So for me, it was something, right? So for me, it was something, right? So for me, it was fish. And obviously now, I don't need to fish. And obviously now, I don't need to fish. And obviously now, I don't need to work on fish. It it wasn't about the work on fish. It it wasn't about the work on fish. It it wasn't about the fish. I hope that came through. I mean, fish. I hope that came through. I mean, fish. I hope that came through. I mean, aquaria are really cool, but it's not aquaria are really cool, but it's not aquaria are really cool, but it's not about the fish. about the fish. about the fish. It was something about the way they It was something about the way they It was something about the way they moved. It was something about the way moved. It was something about the way moved. It was something about the way that it tickled my excitement. I used to that it tickled my excitement. I used to that it tickled my excitement. I used to get dropped off at this little pet shop get dropped off at this little pet shop get dropped off at this little pet shop in California Avenue in Palo Alto called in California Avenue in Palo Alto called in California Avenue in Palo Alto called Muni's Pet Shop. My mom used this child Muni's Pet Shop. My mom used this child Muni's Pet Shop. My mom used this child care and she would drop me off there and care and she would drop me off there and care and she would drop me off there and I had this book and I would log all the I had this book and I would log all the I had this book and I would log all the tropical fish and which ones could be tropical fish and which ones could be tropical fish and which ones could be with which ones and then I would I was with which ones and then I would I was with which ones and then I would I was obsessed, right? But for me it was obsessed, right? But for me it was obsessed, right? But for me it was something about organizing and being something about organizing and being something about organizing and being able to make reliable predictions. It able to make reliable predictions. It able to make reliable predictions. It was about parsimony. It was about was about parsimony. It was about was about parsimony. It was about principles as opposed to and the colors principles as opposed to and the colors principles as opposed to and the colors delighted me and all that kind of stuff. delighted me and all that kind of stuff. delighted me and all that kind of stuff. It the equipment delighted me. But then It the equipment delighted me. But then It the equipment delighted me. But then I hit puberty and then like it was I hit puberty and then like it was I hit puberty and then like it was something else. And um and then I went something else. And um and then I went something else. And um and then I went to college and it was something else. to college and it was something else. to college and it was something else. And I got a girlfriend and it was And I got a girlfriend and it was And I got a girlfriend and it was something else. So something else. So something else. So it changes over time, but this is why I it changes over time, but this is why I it changes over time, but this is why I recommended it to that young 15-year-old recommended it to that young 15-year-old recommended it to that young 15-year-old person that they learn to tap into that sense that they learn to tap into that sense that they learn to tap into that sense of like oh like this is cool. Like this of like oh like this is cool. Like this of like oh like this is cool. Like this feels cool. I know not everyone else feels cool. I know not everyone else feels cool. I know not everyone else thinks it's cool. Maybe they do. Like thinks it's cool. Maybe they do. Like thinks it's cool. Maybe they do. Like this feels good. I actually have a this feels good. I actually have a this feels good. I actually have a somatic experience of this. I'm not a somatic experience of this. I'm not a somatic experience of this. I'm not a very somatically oriented person. I'm very somatically oriented person. I'm very somatically oriented person. I'm more up here. But I actually kind of more up here. But I actually kind of more up here. But I actually kind of know if I'm onto something if this left know if I'm onto something if this left know if I'm onto something if this left arm just kind of starts fidgeting like arm just kind of starts fidgeting like arm just kind of starts fidgeting like it's like I want to move or like some it's like I want to move or like some it's like I want to move or like some people you can start to identify ways in people you can start to identify ways in people you can start to identify ways in which you suddenly have this positive which you suddenly have this positive which you suddenly have this positive energy. It's not a fear energy. It's energy. It's not a fear energy. It's energy. It's not a fear energy. It's almost like a magnetism to things. And almost like a magnetism to things. And almost like a magnetism to things. And just don't be confused and or just don't be confused and or just don't be confused and or misdirected in thinking that it's that misdirected in thinking that it's that misdirected in thinking that it's that thing. It's that again energy or that thing. It's that again energy or that thing. It's that again energy or that attraction to something that feels right attraction to something that feels right attraction to something that feels right that is your that is your that is your you know, I wish we had these divining you know, I wish we had these divining you know, I wish we had these divining rods to find water. rods to find water. rods to find water. That's your tool. It's like antennae. That's your tool. It's like antennae. That's your tool. It's like antennae. You want to grow your antennae. So how You want to grow your antennae. So how You want to grow your antennae. So how do you follow your dreams? Well, do you follow your dreams? Well, do you follow your dreams? Well, I never thought I'd do a podcast. I never thought I'd do a podcast. I never thought I'd do a podcast. I never thought I'd become a I never thought I'd become a I never thought I'd become a neuroscientist. You you have to be neuroscientist. You you have to be neuroscientist. You you have to be willing of course to take risks and willing of course to take risks and willing of course to take risks and um and to iterate quickly but not so and to iterate quickly but not so and to iterate quickly but not so quickly that you know, you fail out quickly that you know, you fail out quickly that you know, you fail out of the game etc. If if get back in etc. of the game etc. If if get back in etc. of the game etc. If if get back in etc. But it's really about developing an But it's really about developing an But it's really about developing an awareness. Now, the key thing is you're awareness. Now, the key thing is you're awareness. Now, the key thing is you're not going to find this by going up a not going to find this by going up a not going to find this by going up a mountain and sitting there or waiting mountain and sitting there or waiting mountain and sitting there or waiting for your passion to just kind of rocket, for your passion to just kind of rocket, for your passion to just kind of rocket, you know, does this or piano fall on you know, does this or piano fall on you know, does this or piano fall on your head. It's not going to happen that your head. It's not going to happen that your head. It's not going to happen that way. You have to interact with the way. You have to interact with the way. You have to interact with the sensory world and different kinds of sensory world and different kinds of sensory world and different kinds of people. And you have to be a little bit people. And you have to be a little bit people. And you have to be a little bit of a of a of a adventurer in a safe way, adventurer in a safe way, adventurer in a safe way, of course, of course, of course, an adventurer and learn to recognize the an adventurer and learn to recognize the an adventurer and learn to recognize the signals. And some people are very in tune with And some people are very in tune with And some people are very in tune with this. Um you know, there's an amazing this. Um you know, there's an amazing this. Um you know, there's an amazing podcast with Rick Rubin recently on Joe podcast with Rick Rubin recently on Joe podcast with Rick Rubin recently on Joe Rogan. It's a podcast where he talks Rogan. It's a podcast where he talks Rogan. It's a podcast where he talks about the creative process. It's kind of about the creative process. It's kind of about the creative process. It's kind of this like it seems like whatever's going on like it seems like whatever's going on like it seems like whatever's going on in that beard of his is just connects to in that beard of his is just connects to in that beard of his is just connects to the world and he can just like the world and he can just like the world and he can just like there. Like that's where you need to go there. Like that's where you need to go there. Like that's where you need to go and that's, you know, but that's part of and that's, you know, but that's part of and that's, you know, but that's part of the magic is you don't really know and the magic is you don't really know and the magic is you don't really know and because it's all energetic. It's because it's all energetic. It's because it's all energetic. It's all energetic. And when I say energetic, all energetic. And when I say energetic, all energetic. And when I say energetic, I don't mean in the mystical sense. I don't mean in the mystical sense. I don't mean in the mystical sense. I mean you have to learn to sense those mean you have to learn to sense those mean you have to learn to sense those fluctuations in energy. Some people can fluctuations in energy. Some people can fluctuations in energy. Some people can sense them very easily because they're sense them very easily because they're sense them very easily because they're very mellow and if something gets them very mellow and if something gets them very mellow and if something gets them really excited, they notice as a big really excited, they notice as a big really excited, they notice as a big delta, as we say in science. Big change. delta, as we say in science. Big change. delta, as we say in science. Big change. Other people, they ride kind of high all Other people, they ride kind of high all Other people, they ride kind of high all the time. the time. the time. And so, everything's exciting to them And so, everything's exciting to them And so, everything's exciting to them and they miss a lot of the subtle and they miss a lot of the subtle and they miss a lot of the subtle fluctuations in what's really special fluctuations in what's really special fluctuations in what's really special and right for them. In fact, mania and right for them. In fact, mania and right for them. In fact, mania is characterized by hyper-elevated is characterized by hyper-elevated is characterized by hyper-elevated levels of dopamine and everything's a levels of dopamine and everything's a levels of dopamine and everything's a good idea. good idea. good idea. Right? And depression is the opposite. Right? And depression is the opposite. Right? And depression is the opposite. Nothing's a good idea. Nothing's going Nothing's a good idea. Nothing's going Nothing's a good idea. Nothing's going to work. Right? And those are the to work. Right? And those are the to work. Right? And those are the extremes and those are rough conditions, extremes and those are rough conditions, extremes and those are rough conditions, obviously. But, for most people, it's about But, for most people, it's about But, for most people, it's about learning to detect those subtle learning to detect those subtle learning to detect those subtle fluctuations. And every time, every fluctuations. And every time, every fluctuations. And every time, every single time, you find somebody who is single time, you find somebody who is single time, you find somebody who is exceptional at their craft and doing exceptional at their craft and doing exceptional at their craft and doing well in life. Okay, there are a lot of well in life. Okay, there are a lot of well in life. Okay, there are a lot of people who are exceptional at their people who are exceptional at their people who are exceptional at their craft, but not necessarily doing well on craft, but not necessarily doing well on craft, but not necessarily doing well on the whole. the whole. the whole. Those people have a kind of uh intuition Those people have a kind of uh intuition Those people have a kind of uh intuition about what feels good to them. This about what feels good to them. This about what feels good to them. This year's Nobel Prize winner in chemistry year's Nobel Prize winner in chemistry year's Nobel Prize winner in chemistry is my colleague Carolyn Bertozzi. And is my colleague Carolyn Bertozzi. And is my colleague Carolyn Bertozzi. And all I know of her, except the fact that all I know of her, except the fact that all I know of her, except the fact that she's amazing chemist, she's amazing chemist, she's amazing chemist, is they did this interview with her and is they did this interview with her and is they did this interview with her and she said that whenever everyone would go she said that whenever everyone would go she said that whenever everyone would go out in college, she was finding excuses out in college, she was finding excuses out in college, she was finding excuses to stay home and read organic chemistry. to stay home and read organic chemistry. to stay home and read organic chemistry. Now, that to me sounds like a bad night. Now, that to me sounds like a bad night. Now, that to me sounds like a bad night. But for her, it was pure delight. And But for her, it was pure delight. And But for her, it was pure delight. And she's wired for that. And she's wired for that. And she's wired for that. And I think her work is going to be vitally I think her work is going to be vitally I think her work is going to be vitally important and transformative for important and transformative for important and transformative for humanity. I really do. So, how do you humanity. I really do. So, how do you humanity. I really do. So, how do you succeed in succeed in succeed in get chasing your dreams? You succeed in get chasing your dreams? You succeed in get chasing your dreams? You succeed in identifying what they are, but you in identifying what they are, but you in identifying what they are, but you don't know at the outset. You want to don't know at the outset. You want to don't know at the outset. You want to find the energy find the energy find the energy to find the right path and continually find the right path and continually find the right path and continually course correct when you will undoubtedly course correct when you will undoubtedly course correct when you will undoubtedly be off your path. be off your path. be off your path. That's essentially what I've done. I That's essentially what I've done. I That's essentially what I've done. I still look for the feeling of delighting still look for the feeling of delighting still look for the feeling of delighting in Costello or the cuttlefish. That's in Costello or the cuttlefish. That's in Costello or the cuttlefish. That's what I'm looking for. It's not a what I'm looking for. It's not a what I'm looking for. It's not a template I have to match, but that's my template I have to match, but that's my template I have to match, but that's my like, oh yeah, I know what that feels like, oh yeah, I know what that feels like, oh yeah, I know what that feels like. It's like a texture. like. It's like a texture. like. It's like a texture. It's like if you think about a bunch of It's like if you think about a bunch of It's like if you think about a bunch of different textures of sandpaper, it's different textures of sandpaper, it's different textures of sandpaper, it's like this one that just feels really like this one that just feels really like this one that just feels really good. And so, you're comparing good. And so, you're comparing good. And so, you're comparing everything to that. everything to that. everything to that. And cuz it's a system And cuz it's a system And cuz it's a system that involves all these chemicals, that involves all these chemicals, that involves all these chemicals, you'll find it if you learn to pay you'll find it if you learn to pay you'll find it if you learn to pay attention to it. But you won't find it attention to it. But you won't find it attention to it. But you won't find it sitting staring at your belly button or sitting staring at your belly button or sitting staring at your belly button or look going up a mountain. You have to be look going up a mountain. You have to be look going up a mountain. You have to be in sensory experience in order to find in sensory experience in order to find in sensory experience in order to find it. Reflection is good, but you need to it. Reflection is good, but you need to it. Reflection is good, but you need to get into action. Okay. get into action. Okay. get into action. Okay. Wow, all right. Well, Wow, all right. Well, Wow, all right. Well, um okay. So, um psilocybin, uh opinion um okay. So, um psilocybin, uh opinion um okay. So, um psilocybin, uh opinion of the psychedelics generally, we just of the psychedelics generally, we just of the psychedelics generally, we just had an episode with my colleague Nolan had an episode with my colleague Nolan had an episode with my colleague Nolan Williams, who's a triple board certified Williams, who's a triple board certified Williams, who's a triple board certified neurologist, psychiatrist. It's a fun neurologist, psychiatrist. It's a fun neurologist, psychiatrist. It's a fun thing about working at Stanford. It's thing about working at Stanford. It's thing about working at Stanford. It's also very humbling cuz you're like, also very humbling cuz you're like, also very humbling cuz you're like, whoa, who are these people? Um whoa, who are these people? Um whoa, who are these people? Um got three board certifications. You got three board certifications. You got three board certifications. You know, that the psilocybin, first of all, know, that the psilocybin, first of all, know, that the psilocybin, first of all, not for everybody. People with not for everybody. People with not for everybody. People with psychosis, it is still illegal, psychosis, it is still illegal, psychosis, it is still illegal, decriminalized in certain places. decriminalized in certain places. decriminalized in certain places. You know, so obviously You know, so obviously You know, so obviously the cautionary notes for people who have the cautionary notes for people who have the cautionary notes for people who have drug addiction issues or other kinds of drug addiction issues or other kinds of drug addiction issues or other kinds of addiction issues need to be thoughtful addiction issues need to be thoughtful addiction issues need to be thoughtful about diving into a neurochemical about diving into a neurochemical about diving into a neurochemical landscape like that, but it does appear landscape like that, but it does appear landscape like that, but it does appear that the that the that the that the that the that the clinical trials on one macro dose. This clinical trials on one macro dose. This clinical trials on one macro dose. This is what's interesting to me. A lot of is what's interesting to me. A lot of is what's interesting to me. A lot of people talk about microdosing people talk about microdosing people talk about microdosing psilocybin, but the data, at least according to but the data, at least according to but the data, at least according to Matthew Johnson, who was also on the Matthew Johnson, who was also on the Matthew Johnson, who was also on the podcast, the data for microdosing are podcast, the data for microdosing are podcast, the data for microdosing are not really there, frankly. not really there, frankly. not really there, frankly. The data on single-session macro dose, The data on single-session macro dose, The data on single-session macro dose, the sort of heroic doses that have been the sort of heroic doses that have been the sort of heroic doses that have been talked about in the psych- the talked about in the psych- the talked about in the psych- the psychonaut community, for depression and psychonaut community, for depression and psychonaut community, for depression and to some extent PTSD, and for eating to some extent PTSD, and for eating to some extent PTSD, and for eating disorders, and for disorders, and for disorders, and for and sort of end-of-life preparation, are and sort of end-of-life preparation, are and sort of end-of-life preparation, are quite encouraging. In fact, the current quite encouraging. In fact, the current quite encouraging. In fact, the current data suggested about 2/3 of people data suggested about 2/3 of people data suggested about 2/3 of people achieve lasting relief from one session. achieve lasting relief from one session. achieve lasting relief from one session. Now, keep in mind, those are guided sessions keep in mind, those are guided sessions keep in mind, those are guided sessions with physicians in the room, etc. I do with physicians in the room, etc. I do with physicians in the room, etc. I do think there's a potential hazard of all think there's a potential hazard of all think there's a potential hazard of all psychedelics, which is psychedelics, which is psychedelics, which is they alter, this includes MDMA or they alter, this includes MDMA or they alter, this includes MDMA or especially MDMA, they alter the chemical especially MDMA, they alter the chemical especially MDMA, they alter the chemical landscape in you such that landscape in you such that landscape in you such that a lot of things can serve as attractors a lot of things can serve as attractors a lot of things can serve as attractors in that state. Meaning, you can get in that state. Meaning, you can get in that state. Meaning, you can get really into the sound of music in an really into the sound of music in an really into the sound of music in an MDMA session. MDMA session. MDMA session. You'll connected to that and waste the You'll connected to that and waste the You'll connected to that and waste the opportunity for some more meaningful opportunity for some more meaningful opportunity for some more meaningful transformative rewiring. transformative rewiring. transformative rewiring. And I do think that And I do think that And I do think that that's worth paying attention to. So, that's worth paying attention to. So, that's worth paying attention to. So, that's the usefulness of having that's the usefulness of having that's the usefulness of having a therapeutic guide there is they can a therapeutic guide there is they can a therapeutic guide there is they can continually steer you back to what, at continually steer you back to what, at continually steer you back to what, at least for you, is the more meaningful least for you, is the more meaningful least for you, is the more meaningful work. But it's very encouraging, and Nolan But it's very encouraging, and Nolan But it's very encouraging, and Nolan Williams, who I trust, Williams, who I trust, Williams, who I trust, uh he's a again triple board certified uh he's a again triple board certified uh he's a again triple board certified MD, said that in the studies of MD, said that in the studies of MD, said that in the studies of lifetime perceived individual and lifetime perceived individual and lifetime perceived individual and societal risk of all the compounds out societal risk of all the compounds out societal risk of all the compounds out there except for caffeine, psilocybin is there except for caffeine, psilocybin is there except for caffeine, psilocybin is at the bottom of the list. at the bottom of the list. at the bottom of the list. Whereas things like, you know, heroin, Whereas things like, you know, heroin, Whereas things like, you know, heroin, cocaine, alcohol, um methamphetamine sit cocaine, alcohol, um methamphetamine sit cocaine, alcohol, um methamphetamine sit at the top of the list. Actually alcohol at the top of the list. Actually alcohol at the top of the list. Actually alcohol quite high on that list at certain quite high on that list at certain quite high on that list at certain amounts of consumption. So I I'm very amounts of consumption. So I I'm very amounts of consumption. So I I'm very excited um excited um excited um about what's happening in the landscape about what's happening in the landscape about what's happening in the landscape of psilocybin, but I'm not so excited of psilocybin, but I'm not so excited of psilocybin, but I'm not so excited about the microdosing data. Very excited about the microdosing data. Very excited about the microdosing data. Very excited about the single heroic dose data. Um about the single heroic dose data. Um about the single heroic dose data. Um one interesting there thing there one interesting there thing there one interesting there thing there perhaps what seems to be the unifying perhaps what seems to be the unifying perhaps what seems to be the unifying feature of a successful psilocybin feature of a successful psilocybin feature of a successful psilocybin psilocybin, excuse me, session psilocybin, excuse me, session psilocybin, excuse me, session is that the at some point the person is that the at some point the person is that the at some point the person feels as if that it's like too much feels as if that it's like too much feels as if that it's like too much of a autonomic thing. They they kind of a autonomic thing. They they kind of a autonomic thing. They they kind of get to this point and then they are get to this point and then they are get to this point and then they are encouraged to quote unquote let go. And encouraged to quote unquote let go. And encouraged to quote unquote let go. And I'm fascinated by this concept of I'm fascinated by this concept of I'm fascinated by this concept of letting go because, you know, I'm a letting go because, you know, I'm a letting go because, you know, I'm a neuroscientist, we don't neuroscientist, we don't neuroscientist, we don't know what that means, but it seems like know what that means, but it seems like know what that means, but it seems like being able to ride the wave of being able to ride the wave of being able to ride the wave of autonomic arousal from top to bottom of autonomic arousal from top to bottom of autonomic arousal from top to bottom seems to be very powerful for trauma and seems to be very powerful for trauma and seems to be very powerful for trauma and depression treatment. And this is depression treatment. And this is depression treatment. And this is interesting, a lot of people think that interesting, a lot of people think that interesting, a lot of people think that one of the major issues in humans one of the major issues in humans one of the major issues in humans nowadays is we're stressed about a lot nowadays is we're stressed about a lot nowadays is we're stressed about a lot of things, but we never actually get to of things, but we never actually get to of things, but we never actually get to go into the full stress response and go into the full stress response and go into the full stress response and then let it relax again. then let it relax again. then let it relax again. Um and catharsis was big at one point, Um and catharsis was big at one point, Um and catharsis was big at one point, you know, scream therapy. Steve Jobs is you know, scream therapy. Steve Jobs is you know, scream therapy. Steve Jobs is really into scream therapies. The really into scream therapies. The really into scream therapies. The whether or not catharsis is healthy or whether or not catharsis is healthy or whether or not catharsis is healthy or not has been debated, but um the data not has been debated, but um the data not has been debated, but um the data are kind of are kind of are kind of pointing to the fact that it may be pointing to the fact that it may be pointing to the fact that it may be provided that the catharsis is not provided that the catharsis is not provided that the catharsis is not obviously someone damaging themself or obviously someone damaging themself or obviously someone damaging themself or somebody else. somebody else. somebody else. Um so maybe we should all be screaming a Um so maybe we should all be screaming a Um so maybe we should all be screaming a lot more. Uh why does my desire to eat lot more. Uh why does my desire to eat lot more. Uh why does my desire to eat disappear after I use the sauna? Oh, disappear after I use the sauna? Oh, disappear after I use the sauna? Oh, interesting. I can go in hungry and get interesting. I can go in hungry and get interesting. I can go in hungry and get out with no desire to eat. Um I can only out with no desire to eat. Um I can only out with no desire to eat. Um I can only speculate. You know, the sauna or any speculate. You know, the sauna or any speculate. You know, the sauna or any kind of deliberate heat exposure that's kind of deliberate heat exposure that's kind of deliberate heat exposure that's uncomfortable releases this molecule uncomfortable releases this molecule uncomfortable releases this molecule dynorphin. This is actually the same dynorphin. This is actually the same dynorphin. This is actually the same molecule that's released in under molecule that's released in under molecule that's released in under conditions of alcohol withdrawal. conditions of alcohol withdrawal. conditions of alcohol withdrawal. Um makes you feel agitated and not good. Um makes you feel agitated and not good. Um makes you feel agitated and not good. And then there's this rebound. What the And then there's this rebound. What the And then there's this rebound. What the way it feels good is later it causes way it feels good is later it causes way it feels good is later it causes this upregulation in the so-called this upregulation in the so-called this upregulation in the so-called mu-opioid receptors. So you're the mu-opioid receptors. So you're the mu-opioid receptors. So you're the chemicals that you have, your so-called chemicals that you have, your so-called chemicals that you have, your so-called endogenous opioids, not the opioids that endogenous opioids, not the opioids that endogenous opioids, not the opioids that are related to the opioid crisis, but are related to the opioid crisis, but are related to the opioid crisis, but the ones that you naturally make are the ones that you naturally make are the ones that you naturally make are able to have a more robust effect after able to have a more robust effect after able to have a more robust effect after the sauna. the sauna. the sauna. Dynorphin is an appetite suppressant. Dynorphin is an appetite suppressant. Dynorphin is an appetite suppressant. Um and for reasons related to kind of Um and for reasons related to kind of Um and for reasons related to kind of general discomfort in the body. So general discomfort in the body. So general discomfort in the body. So that's the only reason I can speculate. that's the only reason I can speculate. that's the only reason I can speculate. There are a number of other things that There are a number of other things that There are a number of other things that sauna does including massive increases sauna does including massive increases sauna does including massive increases in growth hormone provided you don't in growth hormone provided you don't in growth hormone provided you don't sauna too much. So if you do it once a sauna too much. So if you do it once a sauna too much. So if you do it once a week for four 20-minute sessions spaced week for four 20-minute sessions spaced week for four 20-minute sessions spaced 5 minutes apart, um you get these 5 minutes apart, um you get these 5 minutes apart, um you get these enormous increases in growth hormone. If enormous increases in growth hormone. If enormous increases in growth hormone. If you start doing it more often, you get you start doing it more often, you get you start doing it more often, you get still significant but smaller increases still significant but smaller increases still significant but smaller increases in growth hormone. in growth hormone. in growth hormone. And my team this is how the podcast goes And my team this is how the podcast goes And my team this is how the podcast goes too. At some point Rob just goes it's too. At some point Rob just goes it's too. At some point Rob just goes it's enough. So if you think that the enough. So if you think that the enough. So if you think that the episodes are long now, they'd be a lot episodes are long now, they'd be a lot episodes are long now, they'd be a lot longer. Listen, I just want to before we longer. Listen, I just want to before we longer. Listen, I just want to before we part, I know it's a Sunday night and part, I know it's a Sunday night and part, I know it's a Sunday night and people have to go. I want to thank people have to go. I want to thank people have to go. I want to thank everyone for coming out tonight. I know everyone for coming out tonight. I know everyone for coming out tonight. I know that um that um that um at least for me I'm still sort of uh at least for me I'm still sort of uh at least for me I'm still sort of uh baffled but pleasantly so that people baffled but pleasantly so that people baffled but pleasantly so that people are interested in investing time to come are interested in investing time to come are interested in investing time to come out and hear uh hours of a nerd like me out and hear uh hours of a nerd like me out and hear uh hours of a nerd like me talk about science and tools. And I'm talk about science and tools. And I'm talk about science and tools. And I'm delighted that people are hopefully delighted that people are hopefully delighted that people are hopefully gleaning some useful information. Please gleaning some useful information. Please gleaning some useful information. Please do pass along the information. I didn't do pass along the information. I didn't do pass along the information. I didn't invent this stuff as I mentioned before, invent this stuff as I mentioned before, invent this stuff as I mentioned before, I was not consulted at the design phase. I was not consulted at the design phase. I was not consulted at the design phase. I have no domain over it. This is the I have no domain over it. This is the I have no domain over it. This is the stuff of Mother Nature and whatever stuff of Mother Nature and whatever stuff of Mother Nature and whatever other beliefs you have, they're here in other beliefs you have, they're here in other beliefs you have, they're here in us. And of course I'd be remiss if I didn't And of course I'd be remiss if I didn't And of course I'd be remiss if I didn't finish by saying have a wonderful night finish by saying have a wonderful night finish by saying have a wonderful night and thank you for your interest in and thank you for your interest in and thank you for your interest in science.