Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an ask me anything, or AMA, episode, which ask me anything, or AMA, episode, which ask me anything, or AMA, episode, which is part of our premium subscriber is part of our premium subscriber is part of our premium subscriber content. Our premium channel was content. Our premium channel was content. Our premium channel was launched in order to raise support for launched in order to raise support for launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast the standard Huberman Lab podcast the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which still comes out once a channel, which still comes out once a channel, which still comes out once a week every Monday, and of course is zero week every Monday, and of course is zero week every Monday, and of course is zero cost to consumer. The premium channel is cost to consumer. The premium channel is cost to consumer. The premium channel is also designed to support exciting also designed to support exciting also designed to support exciting research being done at major research being done at major research being done at major universities like Stanford and universities like Stanford and universities like Stanford and elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance in the near future. performance in the near future. performance in the near future. If you'd like to check out the premium If you'd like to check out the premium If you'd like to check out the premium channel subscription model, you can go channel subscription model, you can go channel subscription model, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium, to hubermanlab.com/premium, to hubermanlab.com/premium, and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, and you're podcast premium subscribers, and you're podcast premium subscribers, and you're watching and/or hearing this, please go watching and/or hearing this, please go watching and/or hearing this, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this episode, and hopefully that will allow episode, and hopefully that will allow episode, and hopefully that will allow you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. And as always, answering your questions. And as always, answering your questions. And as always, I will strive to be as accurate as I will strive to be as accurate as I will strive to be as accurate as possible, as thorough as possible, and possible, as thorough as possible, and possible, as thorough as possible, and yet as concise as possible. The first yet as concise as possible. The first yet as concise as possible. The first question today is about adaptogens. Some question today is about adaptogens. Some question today is about adaptogens. Some of you may have heard of adaptogens. I'm of you may have heard of adaptogens. I'm of you may have heard of adaptogens. I'm guessing many of you have not heard of guessing many of you have not heard of guessing many of you have not heard of adaptogens. The strict definition of adaptogens is The strict definition of adaptogens is The strict definition of adaptogens is still evolving, meaning no one really still evolving, meaning no one really still evolving, meaning no one really knows what adaptogens mean, and what's knows what adaptogens mean, and what's knows what adaptogens mean, and what's included in adaptogens, and what's included in adaptogens, and what's included in adaptogens, and what's excluded from adaptogens. But the most excluded from adaptogens. But the most excluded from adaptogens. But the most common definition of an adaptogen is a common definition of an adaptogen is a common definition of an adaptogen is a compound that is typically a supplement compound that is typically a supplement compound that is typically a supplement or a drug, although it could be a or a drug, although it could be a or a drug, although it could be a behavior if you really think about it, behavior if you really think about it, behavior if you really think about it, that helps you adapt to and buffer that helps you adapt to and buffer that helps you adapt to and buffer stress. So, when you hear about adaptogens, So, when you hear about adaptogens, So, when you hear about adaptogens, there are three main categories of there are three main categories of there are three main categories of adaptogens that come to mind. The first adaptogens that come to mind. The first adaptogens that come to mind. The first are things that are contained in food. are things that are contained in food. are things that are contained in food. So, these would be vitamins or So, these would be vitamins or So, these would be vitamins or micronutrients that one could easily micronutrients that one could easily micronutrients that one could easily find in food, but find in food, but find in food, but one would have to consume a fairly one would have to consume a fairly one would have to consume a fairly restricted number or type of foods in restricted number or type of foods in restricted number or type of foods in order to obtain those things or consume order to obtain those things or consume order to obtain those things or consume a lot of those foods in order to get a lot of those foods in order to get a lot of those foods in order to get sufficient dosages of those adaptogen sufficient dosages of those adaptogen sufficient dosages of those adaptogen compounds in order to buffer stress. compounds in order to buffer stress. compounds in order to buffer stress. Some good examples of these would be any Some good examples of these would be any Some good examples of these would be any kind of vitamin, either water soluble or kind of vitamin, either water soluble or kind of vitamin, either water soluble or fat soluble, that can adjust or reduce fat soluble, that can adjust or reduce fat soluble, that can adjust or reduce what are so-called reactive oxygen what are so-called reactive oxygen what are so-called reactive oxygen species. And then that's what gives rise species. And then that's what gives rise species. And then that's what gives rise to this idea that antioxidants are good to this idea that antioxidants are good to this idea that antioxidants are good for us. Now, over the last 10 years or for us. Now, over the last 10 years or for us. Now, over the last 10 years or so, there's been a shift. What shift has so, there's been a shift. What shift has so, there's been a shift. What shift has occurred? Well, occurred? Well, occurred? Well, about 10 years ago, you often heard about 10 years ago, you often heard about 10 years ago, you often heard about antioxidants, about antioxidants, about antioxidants, antioxidants and vitamins, antioxidants and vitamins, antioxidants and vitamins, antioxidants in this food, this superfood, etc. in this food, this superfood, etc. in this food, this superfood, etc. And why were people talking about And why were people talking about And why were people talking about antioxidants? Well, just to remind you, antioxidants? Well, just to remind you, antioxidants? Well, just to remind you, reactive oxygen species reactive oxygen species reactive oxygen species are types of reactions and molecules are types of reactions and molecules are types of reactions and molecules that occur in cells that occur in cells that occur in cells when cells get stressed and or age, and when cells get stressed and or age, and when cells get stressed and or age, and antioxidants are the compounds that antioxidants are the compounds that antioxidants are the compounds that reduce those reactive oxygen species. reduce those reactive oxygen species. reduce those reactive oxygen species. Reactive oxygen species are bad for Reactive oxygen species are bad for Reactive oxygen species are bad for cells because they tend to hinder the cells because they tend to hinder the cells because they tend to hinder the function of mitochondria, which are function of mitochondria, which are function of mitochondria, which are associated with energy production in associated with energy production in associated with energy production in those cells. So, what do we know for those cells. So, what do we know for those cells. So, what do we know for sure? We know that as cells get older or sure? We know that as cells get older or sure? We know that as cells get older or as any cell or biological system, organ, as any cell or biological system, organ, as any cell or biological system, organ, tissue, etc. gets stressed a lot over tissue, etc. gets stressed a lot over tissue, etc. gets stressed a lot over time, the number of reactive oxygen time, the number of reactive oxygen time, the number of reactive oxygen species increases in those cells and species increases in those cells and species increases in those cells and tissues and organs, and antioxidants, tissues and organs, and antioxidants, tissues and organs, and antioxidants, which can include certain vitamins, but which can include certain vitamins, but which can include certain vitamins, but also some micronutrients, are effective also some micronutrients, are effective also some micronutrients, are effective in reducing those reactive oxygen in reducing those reactive oxygen in reducing those reactive oxygen species. Now, what's occurred over the species. Now, what's occurred over the species. Now, what's occurred over the last 10 years is that we know that last 10 years is that we know that last 10 years is that we know that reactive oxygen species are a major reactive oxygen species are a major reactive oxygen species are a major source of depleting cellular function by way of depleting cellular function by way of depleting cellular function by way of depleting mitochondrial function, but depleting mitochondrial function, but depleting mitochondrial function, but they are just one of many mechanisms they are just one of many mechanisms they are just one of many mechanisms that can deplete cellular function that can deplete cellular function that can deplete cellular function mitochondrial function. So, nowadays, mitochondrial function. So, nowadays, mitochondrial function. So, nowadays, you'll hear about reactive oxygen you'll hear about reactive oxygen you'll hear about reactive oxygen species and antioxidants, but not as species and antioxidants, but not as species and antioxidants, but not as much as you used to. Now, you hear a lot much as you used to. Now, you hear a lot much as you used to. Now, you hear a lot more about inflammatory responses and more about inflammatory responses and more about inflammatory responses and inflammatory cytokines also being an inflammatory cytokines also being an inflammatory cytokines also being an issue. And the truth is all of these issue. And the truth is all of these issue. And the truth is all of these things are an issue. So, going back to things are an issue. So, going back to things are an issue. So, going back to this question about adaptogens, this question about adaptogens, this question about adaptogens, adaptogens include these three adaptogens include these three adaptogens include these three categories. I've told you the first, categories. I've told you the first, categories. I've told you the first, which are the vitamins and which are the vitamins and which are the vitamins and micronutrients that are contained in micronutrients that are contained in micronutrients that are contained in food that can reduce reactive oxygen food that can reduce reactive oxygen food that can reduce reactive oxygen species and other aspects of cellular species and other aspects of cellular species and other aspects of cellular stress, such as inflammatory cytokines. stress, such as inflammatory cytokines. stress, such as inflammatory cytokines. What are some of those things that occur What are some of those things that occur What are some of those things that occur in foods? Well, in foods? Well, in foods? Well, in order to answer that, let's just in order to answer that, let's just in order to answer that, let's just think about what sorts of foods think about what sorts of foods think about what sorts of foods themselves can act as adaptogens. themselves can act as adaptogens. themselves can act as adaptogens. It's commonly held that the dark leafy It's commonly held that the dark leafy It's commonly held that the dark leafy greens type foods, for those of you that greens type foods, for those of you that greens type foods, for those of you that eat plants, and I think the majority of eat plants, and I think the majority of eat plants, and I think the majority of people out there do eat plants. I know people out there do eat plants. I know people out there do eat plants. I know that the carnivore diet and lion diet that the carnivore diet and lion diet that the carnivore diet and lion diet and some other diets tend to exclude plants. some other diets tend to exclude plants. some other diets tend to exclude plants. And we'll address that in briefly at And we'll address that in briefly at And we'll address that in briefly at some point in today's discussion, but some point in today's discussion, but some point in today's discussion, but dark leafy greens are known to contain a dark leafy greens are known to contain a dark leafy greens are known to contain a number of compounds in the form of number of compounds in the form of number of compounds in the form of vitamins and micronutrients that are vitamins and micronutrients that are vitamins and micronutrients that are very effective in reducing reactive very effective in reducing reactive very effective in reducing reactive oxygen species and inflammatory oxygen species and inflammatory oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines. So, if you're somebody who's cytokines. So, if you're somebody who's cytokines. So, if you're somebody who's interested in adaptogens and adaptogenic interested in adaptogens and adaptogenic interested in adaptogens and adaptogenic processes, reducing stress and buffering processes, reducing stress and buffering processes, reducing stress and buffering stress, which of course has its role in stress, which of course has its role in stress, which of course has its role in buffering daily stress in order to help buffering daily stress in order to help buffering daily stress in order to help you sleep better, to improve cellular you sleep better, to improve cellular you sleep better, to improve cellular function for longevity, sports function for longevity, sports function for longevity, sports performance, cognitive performance, that performance, cognitive performance, that performance, cognitive performance, that is all good and it makes sense why is all good and it makes sense why is all good and it makes sense why people would be interested in people would be interested in people would be interested in adaptogens, but remember that the two adaptogens, but remember that the two adaptogens, but remember that the two main adaptogens that you should think to main adaptogens that you should think to main adaptogens that you should think to first are going to be behaviors and first are going to be behaviors and first are going to be behaviors and nutrition. I have started with nutrition nutrition. I have started with nutrition nutrition. I have started with nutrition on purpose. on purpose. on purpose. As I mentioned, we'll get to behaviors As I mentioned, we'll get to behaviors As I mentioned, we'll get to behaviors in a moment. So, if you're interested in a moment. So, if you're interested in a moment. So, if you're interested in adaptogens at all, I highly recommend adaptogens at all, I highly recommend adaptogens at all, I highly recommend that you include at least two to four that you include at least two to four that you include at least two to four servings of dark leafy greens and or servings of dark leafy greens and or servings of dark leafy greens and or cruciferous vegetables per day. I think cruciferous vegetables per day. I think cruciferous vegetables per day. I think that'd be highly advantageous. And just that'd be highly advantageous. And just that'd be highly advantageous. And just be aware that excessively heating dark be aware that excessively heating dark be aware that excessively heating dark leafy greens or cruciferous vegetables leafy greens or cruciferous vegetables leafy greens or cruciferous vegetables can actually destroy the very nutrients can actually destroy the very nutrients can actually destroy the very nutrients and micronutrients that act in an and micronutrients that act in an and micronutrients that act in an adaptogenic way. That does not mean that adaptogenic way. That does not mean that adaptogenic way. That does not mean that you need to eat raw broccoli or you need to eat raw broccoli or you need to eat raw broccoli or cauliflower. Just the thought of that cauliflower. Just the thought of that cauliflower. Just the thought of that makes me nauseous. It's very hard to makes me nauseous. It's very hard to makes me nauseous. It's very hard to digest. Some people might like that or digest. Some people might like that or digest. Some people might like that or can digest it uh more easily than can digest it uh more easily than can digest it uh more easily than others. So, it's perfectly fine to cook others. So, it's perfectly fine to cook others. So, it's perfectly fine to cook your cruciferous vegetables and dark your cruciferous vegetables and dark your cruciferous vegetables and dark leafy greens, but you don't want to leafy greens, but you don't want to leafy greens, but you don't want to overcook them. What's overcooking and overcook them. What's overcooking and overcook them. What's overcooking and what's uh undercooking? There's uh no what's uh undercooking? There's uh no what's uh undercooking? There's uh no strict cutoff in terms of temperature, strict cutoff in terms of temperature, strict cutoff in terms of temperature, but basically what the literature says but basically what the literature says but basically what the literature says is that if you heat vegetables is that if you heat vegetables is that if you heat vegetables to the point where the colored fluid is to the point where the colored fluid is to the point where the colored fluid is leaching out of them into a broth type leaching out of them into a broth type leaching out of them into a broth type um you know, into water or the or um you know, into water or the or um you know, into water or the or whatever fluid surrounds them, well, whatever fluid surrounds them, well, whatever fluid surrounds them, well, then you would be well off to ingest then you would be well off to ingest then you would be well off to ingest that fluid as well because it contained that fluid as well because it contained that fluid as well because it contained in the water or the fluid that's in the water or the fluid that's in the water or the fluid that's leaching out from the cruciferous leaching out from the cruciferous leaching out from the cruciferous vegetables or from the dark leafy greens vegetables or from the dark leafy greens vegetables or from the dark leafy greens are going to be a lot of those very are going to be a lot of those very are going to be a lot of those very adaptogenic molecules that you're adaptogenic molecules that you're adaptogenic molecules that you're interested in the first place. Okay, so interested in the first place. Okay, so interested in the first place. Okay, so I probably surprised some people by I probably surprised some people by I probably surprised some people by starting off my answer to the question starting off my answer to the question starting off my answer to the question of what are adaptogens, are they worth of what are adaptogens, are they worth of what are adaptogens, are they worth thinking about and pursuing, and if so, thinking about and pursuing, and if so, thinking about and pursuing, and if so, how can I get them by talking about how can I get them by talking about how can I get them by talking about food? But I think it is important to food? But I think it is important to food? But I think it is important to understand that you can get a lot of understand that you can get a lot of understand that you can get a lot of adaptogens from food and indeed some of adaptogens from food and indeed some of adaptogens from food and indeed some of the best adaptogens do come from dark the best adaptogens do come from dark the best adaptogens do come from dark leafy greens and cruciferous vegetables. leafy greens and cruciferous vegetables. leafy greens and cruciferous vegetables. So, I'd be remiss if I didn't uh mention So, I'd be remiss if I didn't uh mention So, I'd be remiss if I didn't uh mention that. The other two categories of that. The other two categories of that. The other two categories of adaptogens are going to be supplement based are going to be supplement based are going to be supplement based adaptogens and then behavioral adaptogens and then behavioral adaptogens and then behavioral adaptogens. Again, here adaptogen adaptogens. Again, here adaptogen adaptogens. Again, here adaptogen defined as anything that can buffer defined as anything that can buffer defined as anything that can buffer stress in a substantial or meaningful stress in a substantial or meaningful stress in a substantial or meaningful way in order to support cellular health, way in order to support cellular health, way in order to support cellular health, organ health, and overall organ health, and overall organ health, and overall daily living and functioning daily living and functioning daily living and functioning including sleep and performance and including sleep and performance and including sleep and performance and mental health. So, the second category mental health. So, the second category mental health. So, the second category of adaptogen are going to be of adaptogen are going to be of adaptogen are going to be supplements. And here again, I just want supplements. And here again, I just want supplements. And here again, I just want to take a step back, make sure that we to take a step back, make sure that we to take a step back, make sure that we are clear about our operational are clear about our operational are clear about our operational definition about what a supplement is. definition about what a supplement is. definition about what a supplement is. We had an episode all about how to We had an episode all about how to We had an episode all about how to design a rational guide to design a rational guide to design a rational guide to supplementation, which included, for supplementation, which included, for supplementation, which included, for example, the idea that for some people example, the idea that for some people example, the idea that for some people the optimal dosage of many supplements the optimal dosage of many supplements the optimal dosage of many supplements is going to be zero, and for other is going to be zero, and for other is going to be zero, and for other people the dosage will be something people the dosage will be something people the dosage will be something else. But to really else. But to really else. But to really pinpoint the key message from that pinpoint the key message from that pinpoint the key message from that episode that I'd like to reiterate now, episode that I'd like to reiterate now, episode that I'd like to reiterate now, but the key but a key message from that but the key but a key message from that but the key but a key message from that episode that I'd like to reiterate now episode that I'd like to reiterate now episode that I'd like to reiterate now is that many people think of supplements is that many people think of supplements is that many people think of supplements as just vitamin supplements. And for as just vitamin supplements. And for as just vitamin supplements. And for that reason, you'll often hear the that reason, you'll often hear the that reason, you'll often hear the argument, "Oh, well, aren't supplements argument, "Oh, well, aren't supplements argument, "Oh, well, aren't supplements just expensive urine? Couldn't you get just expensive urine? Couldn't you get just expensive urine? Couldn't you get all of that from food? Aren't you just all of that from food? Aren't you just all of that from food? Aren't you just urinating out all the water-soluble urinating out all the water-soluble urinating out all the water-soluble vitamins and maybe even storing excess vitamins and maybe even storing excess vitamins and maybe even storing excess amounts of the fat-soluble vitamins in a amounts of the fat-soluble vitamins in a amounts of the fat-soluble vitamins in a way that's unhealthy or not way that's unhealthy or not way that's unhealthy or not cost-effective and so on?" cost-effective and so on?" cost-effective and so on?" When we talk about supplements, yes, it When we talk about supplements, yes, it When we talk about supplements, yes, it can include vitamin supplements. can include vitamin supplements. can include vitamin supplements. However, there are many compounds that However, there are many compounds that However, there are many compounds that we would describe as supplements that we would describe as supplements that we would describe as supplements that are not vitamin supplements and that you are not vitamin supplements and that you are not vitamin supplements and that you could not obtain from food or that you could not obtain from food or that you could not obtain from food or that you could never obtain from food in could never obtain from food in could never obtain from food in sufficient enough qualities to have a sufficient enough qualities to have a sufficient enough qualities to have a robust positive biological effect robust positive biological effect robust positive biological effect without consuming an enormous number of without consuming an enormous number of without consuming an enormous number of calories or overriding your gut calories or overriding your gut calories or overriding your gut mechanically. For instance, mechanically. For instance, mechanically. For instance, if there were, say, um a herb, and we'll if there were, say, um a herb, and we'll if there were, say, um a herb, and we'll talk about such herbs in a moment, that talk about such herbs in a moment, that talk about such herbs in a moment, that contained an effective adaptogen, contained an effective adaptogen, contained an effective adaptogen, but you would never want to eat the but you would never want to eat the but you would never want to eat the plant itself or include that herb in any plant itself or include that herb in any plant itself or include that herb in any kind of recipe, well, then chances are kind of recipe, well, then chances are kind of recipe, well, then chances are this herb, which we'll define in a this herb, which we'll define in a this herb, which we'll define in a moment, is not a vitamin supplement. It moment, is not a vitamin supplement. It moment, is not a vitamin supplement. It is a is a is a probably not even best thought of as a probably not even best thought of as a probably not even best thought of as a supplement. It's best thought of as a supplement. It's best thought of as a supplement. It's best thought of as a compound that's sold over the counter, compound that's sold over the counter, compound that's sold over the counter, much like a prescription drug, although much like a prescription drug, although much like a prescription drug, although it's not prescription. It doesn't it's not prescription. It doesn't it's not prescription. It doesn't require a prescription to get it. So, require a prescription to get it. So, require a prescription to get it. So, there are a lot of things like that there are a lot of things like that there are a lot of things like that we include under the umbrella of this we include under the umbrella of this we include under the umbrella of this word supplements, and unfortunately, word supplements, and unfortunately, word supplements, and unfortunately, because of that, a lot of people think, because of that, a lot of people think, because of that, a lot of people think, "Oh, you don't need supplements." And of "Oh, you don't need supplements." And of "Oh, you don't need supplements." And of course, you don't need supplements per course, you don't need supplements per course, you don't need supplements per se, but many people do derive tremendous se, but many people do derive tremendous se, but many people do derive tremendous benefit from them. In the context of benefit from them. In the context of benefit from them. In the context of adaptogens, there are two or three in adaptogens, there are two or three in adaptogens, there are two or three in particular that can be very beneficial particular that can be very beneficial particular that can be very beneficial for buffering the stress response, for buffering the stress response, for buffering the stress response, especially over short periods of time of especially over short periods of time of especially over short periods of time of about 2 to 3 weeks. about 2 to 3 weeks. about 2 to 3 weeks. So, when would you use these? Well, for So, when would you use these? Well, for So, when would you use these? Well, for instance, if you are in a particularly instance, if you are in a particularly instance, if you are in a particularly stressful mode of life, either because stressful mode of life, either because stressful mode of life, either because of family or relational or school or of family or relational or school or of family or relational or school or work demands or new kid in the house or work demands or new kid in the house or work demands or new kid in the house or any number of different things or you've any number of different things or you've any number of different things or you've been ill or you're recovering from been ill or you're recovering from been ill or you're recovering from injury, taking an adaptogen in the form of taking an adaptogen in the form of taking an adaptogen in the form of supplement can actually be very useful supplement can actually be very useful supplement can actually be very useful for buffering this hormone and the for buffering this hormone and the for buffering this hormone and the general systems it's associated with general systems it's associated with general systems it's associated with called cortisol. It's very healthy to called cortisol. It's very healthy to called cortisol. It's very healthy to have high levels of cortisol early in have high levels of cortisol early in have high levels of cortisol early in the day, shortly after you wake up, and the day, shortly after you wake up, and the day, shortly after you wake up, and then that ought to taper off toward the then that ought to taper off toward the then that ought to taper off toward the afternoon and evening. However, if afternoon and evening. However, if afternoon and evening. However, if cortisol is chronically elevated cortisol is chronically elevated cortisol is chronically elevated throughout the day or if that peak in throughout the day or if that peak in throughout the day or if that peak in cortisol is arriving too late in the cortisol is arriving too late in the cortisol is arriving too late in the day, that is known to be associated with day, that is known to be associated with day, that is known to be associated with mental health and physical health mental health and physical health mental health and physical health issues, as has been shown by labs at issues, as has been shown by labs at issues, as has been shown by labs at Stanford and elsewhere. It's been shown Stanford and elsewhere. It's been shown Stanford and elsewhere. It's been shown in animal models and in humans. in animal models and in humans. in animal models and in humans. Talked many times before and I'll just Talked many times before and I'll just Talked many times before and I'll just remind you again one of the best ways to remind you again one of the best ways to remind you again one of the best ways to restrict that restrict that restrict that cortisol peak to the early part of the day is to peak to the early part of the day is to peak to the early part of the day is to get morning sunlight in your eyes as get morning sunlight in your eyes as get morning sunlight in your eyes as soon as you can. Once the sun is up, get soon as you can. Once the sun is up, get soon as you can. Once the sun is up, get outside face in the direction of the outside face in the direction of the outside face in the direction of the sun, even on overcast days. Don't wear sun, even on overcast days. Don't wear sun, even on overcast days. Don't wear sunglasses. Look at it for 5 to 30 sunglasses. Look at it for 5 to 30 sunglasses. Look at it for 5 to 30 minutes. Definitely blink so you don't minutes. Definitely blink so you don't minutes. Definitely blink so you don't damage your eyes, so on and so forth. damage your eyes, so on and so forth. damage your eyes, so on and so forth. Why 5 minutes or 30 minutes? Well, 5 Why 5 minutes or 30 minutes? Well, 5 Why 5 minutes or 30 minutes? Well, 5 minutes on a clear day should be minutes on a clear day should be minutes on a clear day should be sufficient. Longer would be fine. Again, sufficient. Longer would be fine. Again, sufficient. Longer would be fine. Again, blink so that you protect your eyes. blink so that you protect your eyes. blink so that you protect your eyes. Blink as needed face in the general Blink as needed face in the general Blink as needed face in the general direction of the sun. On days when you direction of the sun. On days when you direction of the sun. On days when you have a lot of overcast or it's really d- have a lot of overcast or it's really d- have a lot of overcast or it's really d- dark, dense cloud cover, well, then dark, dense cloud cover, well, then dark, dense cloud cover, well, then you'd want to be outside longer. And if you'd want to be outside longer. And if you'd want to be outside longer. And if you don't have access to sunlight for you don't have access to sunlight for you don't have access to sunlight for whatever reason, then you want to do the whatever reason, then you want to do the whatever reason, then you want to do the same thing with bright artificial lights same thing with bright artificial lights same thing with bright artificial lights indoors. Um either so-called SAD lamp or Um either so-called SAD lamp or Um either so-called SAD lamp or otherwise, that's a great way to otherwise, that's a great way to otherwise, that's a great way to restrict that cortisol peak to early in restrict that cortisol peak to early in restrict that cortisol peak to early in the day. But even if you're doing that, the day. But even if you're doing that, the day. But even if you're doing that, if you have a stressful life for if you have a stressful life for if you have a stressful life for whatever reason, even if you're getting whatever reason, even if you're getting whatever reason, even if you're getting that morning sunlight, which I hope you that morning sunlight, which I hope you that morning sunlight, which I hope you are, you're getting your exercise, are, you're getting your exercise, are, you're getting your exercise, you're trying to sleep better, um and you're trying to sleep better, um and you're trying to sleep better, um and more as we all should most of the time. more as we all should most of the time. more as we all should most of the time. Well, then you're you may be somebody Well, then you're you may be somebody Well, then you're you may be somebody who wants to take a adaptogen in the who wants to take a adaptogen in the who wants to take a adaptogen in the form of a supplement. And the three form of a supplement. And the three form of a supplement. And the three supplements that can be very effective supplements that can be very effective supplements that can be very effective in buffering cortisol are ashwagandha, in buffering cortisol are ashwagandha, in buffering cortisol are ashwagandha, which I'll talk about first, lion's which I'll talk about first, lion's which I'll talk about first, lion's mane, and chaga. Lion's mane and chaga mane, and chaga. Lion's mane and chaga mane, and chaga. Lion's mane and chaga are in the fungi group, so they count as are in the fungi group, so they count as are in the fungi group, so they count as mushrooms. They are not psychedelic mushrooms. They are not psychedelic mushrooms. They are not psychedelic mushrooms. Let's talk about ashwagandha mushrooms. Let's talk about ashwagandha mushrooms. Let's talk about ashwagandha first. Ashwagandha is at the top of the first. Ashwagandha is at the top of the first. Ashwagandha is at the top of the list because it is indeed a very potent list because it is indeed a very potent list because it is indeed a very potent adaptogen. How can I say that? Well, adaptogen. How can I say that? Well, adaptogen. How can I say that? Well, there are a number of studies now, there are a number of studies now, there are a number of studies now, including several excellent ones in including several excellent ones in including several excellent ones in humans, that report that taking that report that taking that report that taking two doses of 300 mg of ashwagandha two doses of 300 mg of ashwagandha two doses of 300 mg of ashwagandha per day can very dramatically buffer per day can very dramatically buffer per day can very dramatically buffer cortisol. So, this is something that you would So, this is something that you would So, this is something that you would have a near impossible time accessing have a near impossible time accessing have a near impossible time accessing from food. I can't imagine that unless from food. I can't imagine that unless from food. I can't imagine that unless you're cooking with the very sources of you're cooking with the very sources of you're cooking with the very sources of ashwagandha and extracting exact amounts that you'd and extracting exact amounts that you'd and extracting exact amounts that you'd be able to get this in any other form be able to get this in any other form be able to get this in any other form except supplement form. So, here I'm except supplement form. So, here I'm except supplement form. So, here I'm going to just briefly reference a paper going to just briefly reference a paper going to just briefly reference a paper and we can provide a reference to the a and we can provide a reference to the a and we can provide a reference to the a reference link to this, that is reference link to this, that is reference link to this, that is um this is a paper from 2012 that's had a this is a paper from 2012 that's had a this is a paper from 2012 that's had a lot of excellent follow-up papers that lot of excellent follow-up papers that lot of excellent follow-up papers that support it. The title of the paper is a support it. The title of the paper is a support it. The title of the paper is a prospective randomized double-blind prospective randomized double-blind prospective randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of safety and placebo-controlled study of safety and placebo-controlled study of safety and efficacy of high concentration of efficacy of high concentration of efficacy of high concentration of full-spectrum extract of ashwagandha full-spectrum extract of ashwagandha full-spectrum extract of ashwagandha root in reducing stress and anxiety in root in reducing stress and anxiety in root in reducing stress and anxiety in adults. And it's a really nice study, adults. And it's a really nice study, adults. And it's a really nice study, not a huge subject pool, but both men not a huge subject pool, but both men not a huge subject pool, but both men and women, and it is carried out for and women, and it is carried out for and women, and it is carried out for long enough that they got to see some long enough that they got to see some long enough that they got to see some really interesting results. And they the really interesting results. And they the really interesting results. And they the um I think that the most interesting um I think that the most interesting um I think that the most interesting result is that taking 300 mg of result is that taking 300 mg of result is that taking 300 mg of ashwagandha twice a day ashwagandha twice a day ashwagandha twice a day led to enormous, I mean, just enormous led to enormous, I mean, just enormous led to enormous, I mean, just enormous changes in serum cortisol. changes in serum cortisol. changes in serum cortisol. Um the statistical significance that Um the statistical significance that Um the statistical significance that they observed in the study was really um they observed in the study was really um they observed in the study was really um fantastic. Um fantastic. Um fantastic. Um fantastically uh high statistical fantastically uh high statistical fantastically uh high statistical significance. They saw the effects of significance. They saw the effects of significance. They saw the effects of ashwagandha on day 15 having initiated ashwagandha on day 15 having initiated ashwagandha on day 15 having initiated the ashwagandha uh consumption on the ashwagandha uh consumption on the ashwagandha uh consumption on day one, of course, day 30, and day 45. day one, of course, day 30, and day 45. day one, of course, day 30, and day 45. And again, this was dramatic reductions And again, this was dramatic reductions And again, this was dramatic reductions in stress in stress in stress as perceived by people, so subjective as perceived by people, so subjective as perceived by people, so subjective stress, and cortisol levels. So, stress, and cortisol levels. So, stress, and cortisol levels. So, ashwagandha is very potent at reducing ashwagandha is very potent at reducing ashwagandha is very potent at reducing cortisol. How would you recapitulate cortisol. How would you recapitulate cortisol. How would you recapitulate this if you wanted to use ashwagandha to this if you wanted to use ashwagandha to this if you wanted to use ashwagandha to buffer stress? Well, a couple of key buffer stress? Well, a couple of key buffer stress? Well, a couple of key points. Mentioned earlier that you want your Mentioned earlier that you want your Mentioned earlier that you want your cortisol peak to come earlier in the cortisol peak to come earlier in the cortisol peak to come earlier in the day. Therefore, you would not want to buffer Therefore, you would not want to buffer Therefore, you would not want to buffer cortisol early in the day. In fact, cortisol early in the day. In fact, cortisol early in the day. In fact, cortisol peaking early in the day cortisol peaking early in the day cortisol peaking early in the day provides an anti-inflammatory, provides an anti-inflammatory, provides an anti-inflammatory, immune supporting, immune supporting, immune supporting, focus and mood supporting effect all day focus and mood supporting effect all day focus and mood supporting effect all day long. So, I would recommend that people long. So, I would recommend that people long. So, I would recommend that people take their first dose of ashwagandha take their first dose of ashwagandha take their first dose of ashwagandha anywhere from 250 to 300 mg sometime in anywhere from 250 to 300 mg sometime in anywhere from 250 to 300 mg sometime in the early afternoon, and then again in the early afternoon, and then again in the early afternoon, and then again in the evening as opposed to taking a the evening as opposed to taking a the evening as opposed to taking a morning dose and an afternoon dose. morning dose and an afternoon dose. morning dose and an afternoon dose. Also, if you're somebody who's exercising for if you're somebody who's exercising for if you're somebody who's exercising for sake of trying to induce adaptations sake of trying to induce adaptations sake of trying to induce adaptations like hypertrophy, the growth of muscles, like hypertrophy, the growth of muscles, like hypertrophy, the growth of muscles, or strength, or improve your endurance or strength, or improve your endurance or strength, or improve your endurance in any way, muscular endurance, or more in any way, muscular endurance, or more in any way, muscular endurance, or more traditional cardiovascular endurance, traditional cardiovascular endurance, traditional cardiovascular endurance, then I recommend that you not then I recommend that you not then I recommend that you not take your ashwagandha prior to exercise take your ashwagandha prior to exercise take your ashwagandha prior to exercise because part of the adaptation response because part of the adaptation response because part of the adaptation response is triggered by increases in cortisol is triggered by increases in cortisol is triggered by increases in cortisol during exercise. Sort of in the same way during exercise. Sort of in the same way during exercise. Sort of in the same way that some of the best adaptations to exercise some of the best adaptations to exercise some of the best adaptations to exercise are reductions in blood pressure and are reductions in blood pressure and are reductions in blood pressure and resting heart rate, and those are resting heart rate, and those are resting heart rate, and those are stimulated by increases in blood stimulated by increases in blood stimulated by increases in blood pressure and increases in heart rate pressure and increases in heart rate pressure and increases in heart rate during exercise. That's just how these during exercise. That's just how these during exercise. That's just how these biological systems work. So, the biological systems work. So, the biological systems work. So, the takeaway is pretty simple. If you're takeaway is pretty simple. If you're takeaway is pretty simple. If you're interested in using ashwagandha as an interested in using ashwagandha as an interested in using ashwagandha as an adaptogen, I would restrict it to later adaptogen, I would restrict it to later adaptogen, I would restrict it to later in the day if you can and not before in the day if you can and not before in the day if you can and not before exercise. Divide it into two doses of exercise. Divide it into two doses of exercise. Divide it into two doses of 250 to 300 mg. 250 to 300 mg. 250 to 300 mg. That's what this paper and other papers like it what this paper and other papers like it what this paper and other papers like it seem to indicate. And then a very seem to indicate. And then a very seem to indicate. And then a very important final point about ashwagandha, important final point about ashwagandha, important final point about ashwagandha, which is that if you're going to take which is that if you're going to take which is that if you're going to take ashwagandha, I recommend not taking it ashwagandha, I recommend not taking it ashwagandha, I recommend not taking it for longer than a month and a half as for longer than a month and a half as for longer than a month and a half as they did in this study. In fact, I would they did in this study. In fact, I would they did in this study. In fact, I would suggest that you only take ashwagandha suggest that you only take ashwagandha suggest that you only take ashwagandha around periods of around periods of around periods of kind of moderate to extreme stress. kind of moderate to extreme stress. kind of moderate to extreme stress. What's moderate, what's extreme is going What's moderate, what's extreme is going What's moderate, what's extreme is going to depend on what you're going through. to depend on what you're going through. to depend on what you're going through. Only you know how much stress and life Only you know how much stress and life Only you know how much stress and life events you can tolerate. So if you've events you can tolerate. So if you've events you can tolerate. So if you've had trouble sleeping and that's unusual had trouble sleeping and that's unusual had trouble sleeping and that's unusual for you or you're dealing with a very for you or you're dealing with a very for you or you're dealing with a very difficult life circumstances or you're difficult life circumstances or you're difficult life circumstances or you're excessive work demand or a new kid as I excessive work demand or a new kid as I excessive work demand or a new kid as I mentioned before, well then buffering mentioned before, well then buffering mentioned before, well then buffering stress with ashwagandha, buffering stress with ashwagandha, buffering stress with ashwagandha, buffering cortisol in the afternoon and evening cortisol in the afternoon and evening cortisol in the afternoon and evening can be very beneficial for you. But then can be very beneficial for you. But then can be very beneficial for you. But then I would say after about um 30 days I would say after about um 30 days I would say after about um 30 days maximum, I would take at least two to maximum, I would take at least two to maximum, I would take at least two to four weeks off. Two weeks is probably four weeks off. Two weeks is probably four weeks off. Two weeks is probably enough, but four weeks off because you enough, but four weeks off because you enough, but four weeks off because you don't want to chronically buffer don't want to chronically buffer don't want to chronically buffer cortisol. It's just not a good idea. But cortisol. It's just not a good idea. But cortisol. It's just not a good idea. But that said, I think ashwagandha is a very that said, I think ashwagandha is a very that said, I think ashwagandha is a very powerful adaptogen. powerful adaptogen. powerful adaptogen. Place at the top of list of Place at the top of list of Place at the top of list of supplement-based adaptogens, but keep in supplement-based adaptogens, but keep in supplement-based adaptogens, but keep in mind that even if you're taking a mind that even if you're taking a mind that even if you're taking a supplement-based adaptogen, that's no supplement-based adaptogen, that's no supplement-based adaptogen, that's no reason to abandon the nutrition and reason to abandon the nutrition and reason to abandon the nutrition and behavioral type uh adaptogenic effects behavioral type uh adaptogenic effects behavioral type uh adaptogenic effects that you can create through eating dark that you can create through eating dark that you can create through eating dark leafy greens, cruciferous vegetables, leafy greens, cruciferous vegetables, leafy greens, cruciferous vegetables, and we'll talk about behaviors in a and we'll talk about behaviors in a and we'll talk about behaviors in a moment. The other two supplement-based moment. The other two supplement-based moment. The other two supplement-based adaptogens, as I mentioned, are lion's adaptogens, as I mentioned, are lion's adaptogens, as I mentioned, are lion's mane mushroom and chaga. And I get asked mane mushroom and chaga. And I get asked mane mushroom and chaga. And I get asked a lot about lion's mane and chaga for a lot about lion's mane and chaga for a lot about lion's mane and chaga for sake of um their purported roles in sake of um their purported roles in sake of um their purported roles in acting as nootropics, as {quote} smart acting as nootropics, as {quote} smart acting as nootropics, as {quote} smart drugs. There are fewer data on the beneficial There are fewer data on the beneficial There are fewer data on the beneficial roles of lion's mane and chaga for sake roles of lion's mane and chaga for sake roles of lion's mane and chaga for sake of um nootropic effects. of um nootropic effects. of um nootropic effects. Um We'll do an entire episode on nootropics We'll do an entire episode on nootropics We'll do an entire episode on nootropics at some point, but um there have been a at some point, but um there have been a at some point, but um there have been a few studies showing that lion's mane and few studies showing that lion's mane and few studies showing that lion's mane and supplementation and chaga supplementation and chaga supplementation and chaga supplementation can improve memory and supplementation can improve memory and supplementation can improve memory and maybe even divergent thinking associated maybe even divergent thinking associated maybe even divergent thinking associated with creativity and things of that sort. with creativity and things of that sort. with creativity and things of that sort. Again, these are not psychedelic Again, these are not psychedelic Again, these are not psychedelic mushrooms. Um, that said, there are good mushrooms. Um, that said, there are good mushrooms. Um, that said, there are good data showing that 1,000 mg, that is 1 g data showing that 1,000 mg, that is 1 g data showing that 1,000 mg, that is 1 g of lion's mane per day, of lion's mane per day, of lion's mane per day, and/or, okay, these and we'll talk about and/or, okay, these and we'll talk about and/or, okay, these and we'll talk about the and/or portion in a moment, and/or the and/or portion in a moment, and/or the and/or portion in a moment, and/or chaga mushroom at 500 to 1,500 mg per chaga mushroom at 500 to 1,500 mg per chaga mushroom at 500 to 1,500 mg per day can act as adaptogens in, again, can act as adaptogens in, again, can act as adaptogens in, again, reducing cortisol, but also and mainly reducing cortisol, but also and mainly reducing cortisol, but also and mainly reducing some of the anti-inflammatory cytokines some of the anti-inflammatory cytokines some of the anti-inflammatory cytokines that are known to circulate in high that are known to circulate in high that are known to circulate in high abundance when you're under a lot of abundance when you're under a lot of abundance when you're under a lot of psychological and/or physical stress. psychological and/or physical stress. psychological and/or physical stress. Things like interleukin-6 and some Things like interleukin-6 and some Things like interleukin-6 and some related molecules. So, here's what I related molecules. So, here's what I related molecules. So, here's what I would recommend. If you are interested would recommend. If you are interested would recommend. If you are interested in exploring adaptogens, I'm a big fan, in exploring adaptogens, I'm a big fan, in exploring adaptogens, I'm a big fan, as some of you probably know if you as some of you probably know if you as some of you probably know if you heard that episode on rational guide to heard that episode on rational guide to heard that episode on rational guide to supplementation, I'm a big fan of mainly supplementation, I'm a big fan of mainly supplementation, I'm a big fan of mainly focusing on taking supplements in single focusing on taking supplements in single focusing on taking supplements in single ingredient formulations, so that you can ingredient formulations, so that you can ingredient formulations, so that you can figure out what dosages are best for you figure out what dosages are best for you figure out what dosages are best for you and so that you can toggle in and out and so that you can toggle in and out and so that you can toggle in and out those adaptogens as needed. So, I, of those adaptogens as needed. So, I, of those adaptogens as needed. So, I, of course, am a fan of taking certain course, am a fan of taking certain course, am a fan of taking certain blends and mixes. The one that we talk blends and mixes. The one that we talk blends and mixes. The one that we talk about a lot on this podcast, about a lot on this podcast, about a lot on this podcast, and we have been a sponsor from the and we have been a sponsor from the and we have been a sponsor from the beginning, I've taken for a decade now, beginning, I've taken for a decade now, beginning, I've taken for a decade now, long before I ever had a podcast, is long before I ever had a podcast, is long before I ever had a podcast, is Athletic Greens, which some of you might Athletic Greens, which some of you might Athletic Greens, which some of you might note does contain some ashwagandha, note does contain some ashwagandha, note does contain some ashwagandha, although the levels of ashwagandha that although the levels of ashwagandha that although the levels of ashwagandha that are contained in Athletic Greens are low are contained in Athletic Greens are low are contained in Athletic Greens are low enough that I don't see any issue with enough that I don't see any issue with enough that I don't see any issue with taking the Athletic Greens consistently taking the Athletic Greens consistently taking the Athletic Greens consistently day-to-day, every day, day-to-day, every day, day-to-day, every day, because you're not getting anywhere near because you're not getting anywhere near because you're not getting anywhere near that 600 mg dosage. But, the idea is that 600 mg dosage. But, the idea is that 600 mg dosage. But, the idea is that if you were going to take that if you were going to take that if you were going to take any adaptogen for sake of buffering any adaptogen for sake of buffering any adaptogen for sake of buffering stress over the short term, say for a stress over the short term, say for a stress over the short term, say for a week or 2 weeks or a month, week or 2 weeks or a month, week or 2 weeks or a month, and then taking that recommended time and then taking that recommended time and then taking that recommended time off, I would start with ashwagandha, off, I would start with ashwagandha, off, I would start with ashwagandha, and then if you feel you need something and then if you feel you need something and then if you feel you need something else to buffer stress, else to buffer stress, else to buffer stress, keeping in mind, of course, that you're keeping in mind, of course, that you're keeping in mind, of course, that you're doing the behavioral and the nutritional doing the behavioral and the nutritional doing the behavioral and the nutritional things to buffer stress as well, you can things to buffer stress as well, you can things to buffer stress as well, you can never abandon those, right? Well, then I never abandon those, right? Well, then I never abandon those, right? Well, then I would suggest adding 1,000 mg or 1,000 would suggest adding 1,000 mg or 1,000 would suggest adding 1,000 mg or 1,000 mg of chaga per day and seeing how that mg of chaga per day and seeing how that mg of chaga per day and seeing how that further um benefits your system in further um benefits your system in further um benefits your system in terms of buffering stress. How would you terms of buffering stress. How would you terms of buffering stress. How would you measure if your stress is being reduced? measure if your stress is being reduced? measure if your stress is being reduced? Well, you're going to be sleeping better Well, you're going to be sleeping better Well, you're going to be sleeping better at night. You're going to feel at night. You're going to feel at night. You're going to feel subjectively better, lower levels of subjectively better, lower levels of subjectively better, lower levels of anxiety, all the things that are anxiety, all the things that are anxiety, all the things that are measured in the types of studies I measured in the types of studies I measured in the types of studies I described before. described before. described before. Now, of course, there's nothing Now, of course, there's nothing Now, of course, there's nothing preventing you from taking 600 mg of preventing you from taking 600 mg of preventing you from taking 600 mg of ashwagandha, a gram of lion's mane, and ashwagandha, a gram of lion's mane, and ashwagandha, a gram of lion's mane, and a gram of chaga. I know some people and a gram of chaga. I know some people and a gram of chaga. I know some people like to just kind of go uh full tilt like to just kind of go uh full tilt like to just kind of go uh full tilt into everything, but I am a big believer into everything, but I am a big believer into everything, but I am a big believer in really trying to isolate which in really trying to isolate which in really trying to isolate which supplements and molecules work best for supplements and molecules work best for supplements and molecules work best for you and which ones don't. Do you need to you and which ones don't. Do you need to you and which ones don't. Do you need to cycle on and off lion's mane and chaga? cycle on and off lion's mane and chaga? cycle on and off lion's mane and chaga? I'm not aware of any data showing that I'm not aware of any data showing that I'm not aware of any data showing that you do. If, however, you're taking them you do. If, however, you're taking them you do. If, however, you're taking them every day, I recommend that you cycle every day, I recommend that you cycle every day, I recommend that you cycle off them after a period of 30 days or off them after a period of 30 days or off them after a period of 30 days or so. And I want to be very clear about so. And I want to be very clear about so. And I want to be very clear about this. Just because I said cycle off this. Just because I said cycle off this. Just because I said cycle off after a period of 30 days or so does not after a period of 30 days or so does not after a period of 30 days or so does not mean that you can't take them for a mean that you can't take them for a mean that you can't take them for a shorter period of time. So, for shorter period of time. So, for shorter period of time. So, for instance, if you know that you're coming instance, if you know that you're coming instance, if you know that you're coming up on a big week of stress, up on a big week of stress, up on a big week of stress, well, then you could take ashwagandha well, then you could take ashwagandha well, then you could take ashwagandha and/or lion's mane and/or chaga and/or lion's mane and/or chaga and/or lion's mane and/or chaga for that week or just that week or for that week or just that week or for that week or just that week or heading into that week or in the heading into that week or in the heading into that week or in the following week and then stop. There's no following week and then stop. There's no following week and then stop. There's no reason why you couldn't take them even reason why you couldn't take them even reason why you couldn't take them even just for one day, although the just for one day, although the just for one day, although the effects tend to be uh a bit cumulative, effects tend to be uh a bit cumulative, effects tend to be uh a bit cumulative, at least when we're talking about um at least when we're talking about um at least when we're talking about um buffering anxiety. In terms of buffering anxiety. In terms of buffering anxiety. In terms of buffering cortisol, that's a very potent effect cortisol, that's a very potent effect cortisol, that's a very potent effect that as far as we know is going to take that as far as we know is going to take that as far as we know is going to take place on day one. Again, keep that place on day one. Again, keep that place on day one. Again, keep that cortisol buffering effect away from cortisol buffering effect away from cortisol buffering effect away from exercise, at least don't take it before exercise, at least don't take it before exercise, at least don't take it before exercise, and try and buffer your exercise, and try and buffer your exercise, and try and buffer your cortisol in the afternoon and evening. cortisol in the afternoon and evening. cortisol in the afternoon and evening. And this is assuming that you're working And this is assuming that you're working And this is assuming that you're working a conventional shift and you're not up a conventional shift and you're not up a conventional shift and you're not up all night and sleeping all day for sake all night and sleeping all day for sake all night and sleeping all day for sake of shift work. Okay, so hopefully of shift work. Okay, so hopefully of shift work. Okay, so hopefully that clarifies things about what that clarifies things about what that clarifies things about what adaptogens are. In fact, I never adaptogens are. In fact, I never adaptogens are. In fact, I never actually read the specific question, but actually read the specific question, but actually read the specific question, but I think I've touched on a number I think I've touched on a number I think I've touched on a number of issues that relate to the specific of issues that relate to the specific of issues that relate to the specific question. And then I'll answer the question. And then I'll answer the question. And then I'll answer the last portion of the answer to this last portion of the answer to this last portion of the answer to this question in a moment um as it relates to question in a moment um as it relates to question in a moment um as it relates to behavioral tools uh, that can act as behavioral tools uh, that can act as behavioral tools uh, that can act as adaptogens. Uh, the question itself was adaptogens. Uh, the question itself was adaptogens. Uh, the question itself was there's a lot of mixed information about there's a lot of mixed information about there's a lot of mixed information about out there about adaptogens like out there about adaptogens like out there about adaptogens like ashwagandha and I think that relates to ashwagandha and I think that relates to ashwagandha and I think that relates to what I said earlier, which is that the what I said earlier, which is that the what I said earlier, which is that the definition of an adaptogen has not definition of an adaptogen has not definition of an adaptogen has not really been cemented, um, in uh, various really been cemented, um, in uh, various really been cemented, um, in uh, various uh, communities. It's different in uh, communities. It's different in uh, communities. It's different in different communities and it's um, different communities and it's um, different communities and it's um, generally um, used as a matter of generally um, used as a matter of generally um, used as a matter of convenience rather than really strictly convenience rather than really strictly convenience rather than really strictly defining what it is and hopefully we've defining what it is and hopefully we've defining what it is and hopefully we've defined it um, defined it um, defined it um, accurately and broadly enough today accurately and broadly enough today accurately and broadly enough today as something that buffers stress. Um, as something that buffers stress. Um, as something that buffers stress. Um, the second part of the question was what the second part of the question was what the second part of the question was what does the scientific evidence say about does the scientific evidence say about does the scientific evidence say about adaptogens and their ability to mediate adaptogens and their ability to mediate adaptogens and their ability to mediate body stress response? They say quite a body stress response? They say quite a body stress response? They say quite a lot and they say that the stress lot and they say that the stress lot and they say that the stress response can be buffered substantially response can be buffered substantially response can be buffered substantially by certain adaptogens, mainly by certain adaptogens, mainly by certain adaptogens, mainly dark leafy greens, cruciferous dark leafy greens, cruciferous dark leafy greens, cruciferous vegetables, uh, ashwagandha, lion's mane and chaga uh, ashwagandha, lion's mane and chaga uh, ashwagandha, lion's mane and chaga and of course all the behavioral things and of course all the behavioral things and of course all the behavioral things that are critical to what we'll list off that are critical to what we'll list off that are critical to what we'll list off in a moment. And then the third portion in a moment. And then the third portion in a moment. And then the third portion of the question is there any solid of the question is there any solid of the question is there any solid evidence that has an effect on evidence that has an effect on evidence that has an effect on neurotransmitters or the HPA, which is part of the um, or the HPA, which is part of the um, or the HPA, which is part of the um, stress modulation axis? stress modulation axis? stress modulation axis? The best evidence is that adaptogens can The best evidence is that adaptogens can The best evidence is that adaptogens can reduce cortisol itself. reduce cortisol itself. reduce cortisol itself. There is very little evidence that There is very little evidence that There is very little evidence that adaptogens can directly modulate adaptogens can directly modulate adaptogens can directly modulate neurotransmitters or neuromodulators neurotransmitters or neuromodulators neurotransmitters or neuromodulators like dopamine, serotonin, etc. But by like dopamine, serotonin, etc. But by like dopamine, serotonin, etc. But by adjusting the timing and levels of adjusting the timing and levels of adjusting the timing and levels of cortisol, especially in the afternoon cortisol, especially in the afternoon cortisol, especially in the afternoon and evening, and evening, and evening, that is going to have indirect effects that is going to have indirect effects that is going to have indirect effects on levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, on levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, on levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, etc. and serotonin, but not direct effects. and serotonin, but not direct effects. and serotonin, but not direct effects. So, the general contour that makes for So, the general contour that makes for So, the general contour that makes for an ideal diurnal schedule, you've heard an ideal diurnal schedule, you've heard an ideal diurnal schedule, you've heard of nocturnal, well the opposite is of nocturnal, well the opposite is of nocturnal, well the opposite is diurnal, being awake during the daytime diurnal, being awake during the daytime diurnal, being awake during the daytime and asleep at night. The ideal kind of and asleep at night. The ideal kind of and asleep at night. The ideal kind of landscape of neurotransmitters is higher landscape of neurotransmitters is higher landscape of neurotransmitters is higher levels of dopamine, norepinephrine and levels of dopamine, norepinephrine and levels of dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine in the early part of the day epinephrine in the early part of the day epinephrine in the early part of the day and cortisol, so-called catecholamines, and cortisol, so-called catecholamines, and cortisol, so-called catecholamines, dopamine, norepinephrine and dopamine, norepinephrine and dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, and high levels of cortisol early in the and high levels of cortisol early in the and high levels of cortisol early in the day as directed by sunlight, exercise, as directed by sunlight, exercise, as directed by sunlight, exercise, caffeine, hydration, movement, all that caffeine, hydration, movement, all that caffeine, hydration, movement, all that stuff being awake and busy and outside stuff being awake and busy and outside stuff being awake and busy and outside or indoors with bright lights and moving or indoors with bright lights and moving or indoors with bright lights and moving about in the early part of the day and about in the early part of the day and about in the early part of the day and into the early afternoon. That's the into the early afternoon. That's the into the early afternoon. That's the best possible way that we are aware of best possible way that we are aware of best possible way that we are aware of to try and get those catecholamines to try and get those catecholamines to try and get those catecholamines released at the highest levels in the released at the highest levels in the released at the highest levels in the early part of the day and then the ideal early part of the day and then the ideal early part of the day and then the ideal contour of a 24-hour cycle be in the contour of a 24-hour cycle be in the contour of a 24-hour cycle be in the later half of the day, the evening and later half of the day, the evening and later half of the day, the evening and night time, you have higher levels of night time, you have higher levels of night time, you have higher levels of things like serotonin, the GABAergic things like serotonin, the GABAergic things like serotonin, the GABAergic system, all the things that are somewhat system, all the things that are somewhat system, all the things that are somewhat sedative and preparing you for sleep and sedative and preparing you for sleep and sedative and preparing you for sleep and lower levels lower levels lower levels of the catecholamines and cortisol as I of the catecholamines and cortisol as I of the catecholamines and cortisol as I described before. So, to directly answer described before. So, to directly answer described before. So, to directly answer the question, is there any evidence that the question, is there any evidence that the question, is there any evidence that adaptogens can alter your adaptogens can alter your adaptogens can alter your neurotransmitters? Yes, but only indirectly and yet that Yes, but only indirectly and yet that Yes, but only indirectly and yet that indirect control over neurotransmitters indirect control over neurotransmitters indirect control over neurotransmitters is substantial and is important and if is substantial and is important and if is substantial and is important and if you do what I described such as getting you do what I described such as getting you do what I described such as getting morning sunlight and ideally you'd get a morning sunlight and ideally you'd get a morning sunlight and ideally you'd get a little bit of deliberate cold water little bit of deliberate cold water little bit of deliberate cold water exposure by the way to boost adrenaline exposure by the way to boost adrenaline exposure by the way to boost adrenaline and nor norepinephrine and dopamine, and nor norepinephrine and dopamine, and nor norepinephrine and dopamine, those catecholamines, early in the day. those catecholamines, early in the day. those catecholamines, early in the day. So, quick 1-minute cold shower even or So, quick 1-minute cold shower even or So, quick 1-minute cold shower even or 3-minute cold shower or if you have 3-minute cold shower or if you have 3-minute cold shower or if you have access to an ice bath early in the day access to an ice bath early in the day access to an ice bath early in the day plus some sunlight, doesn't matter which plus some sunlight, doesn't matter which plus some sunlight, doesn't matter which one you do first, doing that early in one you do first, doing that early in one you do first, doing that early in the day is really going to create that the day is really going to create that the day is really going to create that peak of cortisol, dopamine, epinephrine peak of cortisol, dopamine, epinephrine peak of cortisol, dopamine, epinephrine early in the day. early in the day. early in the day. I can't emphasize how beneficial all of I can't emphasize how beneficial all of I can't emphasize how beneficial all of that can be. Um and exercise if you can that can be. Um and exercise if you can that can be. Um and exercise if you can early in the day. Some people can't early in the day. Some people can't early in the day. Some people can't exercise till later in the day. I'd exercise till later in the day. I'd exercise till later in the day. I'd rather see people exercise later in the rather see people exercise later in the rather see people exercise later in the day than not at all provided it does not day than not at all provided it does not day than not at all provided it does not disrupt their night time sleep, which of disrupt their night time sleep, which of disrupt their night time sleep, which of course sleep is the foundation of mental course sleep is the foundation of mental course sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. So, yes, there's modulation performance. So, yes, there's modulation performance. So, yes, there's modulation of neurotransmitters, but most of those of neurotransmitters, but most of those of neurotransmitters, but most of those are downstream of the effects on are downstream of the effects on are downstream of the effects on cortisol that we've been talking about. cortisol that we've been talking about. cortisol that we've been talking about. So, we've defined nutritional So, we've defined nutritional So, we've defined nutritional adaptogens, supplement-based adaptogens, supplement-based adaptogens, supplement-based adaptogens, although I don't really like the word although I don't really like the word although I don't really like the word supplements anymore unless we're talking supplements anymore unless we're talking supplements anymore unless we're talking about vitamin supplements for reasons we about vitamin supplements for reasons we about vitamin supplements for reasons we talked about earlier. And then there's talked about earlier. And then there's talked about earlier. And then there's the third category of adaptogens, which the third category of adaptogens, which the third category of adaptogens, which are the behavioral tools that you can are the behavioral tools that you can are the behavioral tools that you can use to buffer stress, which qualifies use to buffer stress, which qualifies use to buffer stress, which qualifies those as an adaptogen. And I think it's those as an adaptogen. And I think it's those as an adaptogen. And I think it's really important that we always keep in really important that we always keep in really important that we always keep in mind that yes, there are supplements, mind that yes, there are supplements, mind that yes, there are supplements, yes, there are prescription drugs out yes, there are prescription drugs out yes, there are prescription drugs out there. In fact, there are prescription there. In fact, there are prescription there. In fact, there are prescription drugs that you can get from a doctor drugs that you can get from a doctor drugs that you can get from a doctor that will potentially zero out your that will potentially zero out your that will potentially zero out your cortisol. But, most doctors are very cortisol. But, most doctors are very cortisol. But, most doctors are very reluctant to prescribe those drugs reluctant to prescribe those drugs reluctant to prescribe those drugs because cortisol provides a very because cortisol provides a very because cortisol provides a very important and functional role early in important and functional role early in important and functional role early in the day. the day. the day. Behaviors are very effective at reducing Behaviors are very effective at reducing Behaviors are very effective at reducing cortisol. What are the most effective cortisol. What are the most effective cortisol. What are the most effective behaviors to reduce cortisol? Well, we behaviors to reduce cortisol? Well, we behaviors to reduce cortisol? Well, we talked about one to restrict cortisol talked about one to restrict cortisol talked about one to restrict cortisol the early part of the day, which is the early part of the day, which is the early part of the day, which is viewing morning sunlight. But, how would viewing morning sunlight. But, how would viewing morning sunlight. But, how would you buffer cortisol in the late you buffer cortisol in the late you buffer cortisol in the late afternoon? It's going to be all the afternoon? It's going to be all the afternoon? It's going to be all the things associated with reducing stress. things associated with reducing stress. things associated with reducing stress. For instance, For instance, For instance, 10 minutes or even 10 minutes or even 10 minutes or even my laboratory and other laboratories my laboratory and other laboratories my laboratory and other laboratories have shown it's even 5 minutes a day of have shown it's even 5 minutes a day of have shown it's even 5 minutes a day of just what would be called mindfulness just what would be called mindfulness just what would be called mindfulness meditation. Very simple, you don't need meditation. Very simple, you don't need meditation. Very simple, you don't need to overcomplicate this. You could use a to overcomplicate this. You could use a to overcomplicate this. You could use a great app like the Waking Up app or great app like the Waking Up app or great app like the Waking Up app or another app of that sort. Or, you can another app of that sort. Or, you can another app of that sort. Or, you can simply sit down, eyes closed, breathe simply sit down, eyes closed, breathe simply sit down, eyes closed, breathe through your nose, and just concentrate through your nose, and just concentrate through your nose, and just concentrate on your breathing. Every time your mind on your breathing. Every time your mind on your breathing. Every time your mind drifts to something else, bring it back drifts to something else, bring it back drifts to something else, bring it back to your breathing. That's shown to your breathing. That's shown to your breathing. That's shown to reduce stress. You could do a 5-minute reduce stress. You could do a 5-minute reduce stress. You could do a 5-minute deliberate breath work practice. My deliberate breath work practice. My deliberate breath work practice. My laboratory published some work related to that. published some work related to that. published some work related to that. Um the breath work practice could be any Um the breath work practice could be any Um the breath work practice could be any number of things. The two that I number of things. The two that I number of things. The two that I recommend the most would be double recommend the most would be double recommend the most would be double inhale followed by a full exhale and inhale followed by a full exhale and inhale followed by a full exhale and then repeat for a period of 5 minutes. then repeat for a period of 5 minutes. then repeat for a period of 5 minutes. Known to substantially reduce anxiety, Known to substantially reduce anxiety, Known to substantially reduce anxiety, stress, and the various physiological stress, and the various physiological stress, and the various physiological systems associated with arousal. You systems associated with arousal. You systems associated with arousal. You could also use box breathing. Inhale, could also use box breathing. Inhale, could also use box breathing. Inhale, hold, exhale, hold for equal durations hold, exhale, hold for equal durations hold, exhale, hold for equal durations for a period of 5 minutes will for a period of 5 minutes will for a period of 5 minutes will substantially reduce stress. I'm a big substantially reduce stress. I'm a big substantially reduce stress. I'm a big fan, as many of you know, of yoga nidra, fan, as many of you know, of yoga nidra, fan, as many of you know, of yoga nidra, which involves no movement. It involves which involves no movement. It involves which involves no movement. It involves just lying there, listening to a script. just lying there, listening to a script. just lying there, listening to a script. Lots of yoga nidra scripts available Lots of yoga nidra scripts available Lots of yoga nidra scripts available online. If you're not interested in the online. If you're not interested in the online. If you're not interested in the intentions and other things included in intentions and other things included in intentions and other things included in yoga nidra, you can buffer stress using yoga nidra, you can buffer stress using yoga nidra, you can buffer stress using an adaptogen like NSDR, non-sleep deep an adaptogen like NSDR, non-sleep deep an adaptogen like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. If you're interested in trying rest. If you're interested in trying rest. If you're interested in trying these sorts of things, there's a sorts of things, there's a sorts of things, there's a NSDR protocol that's 10 minutes long. NSDR protocol that's 10 minutes long. NSDR protocol that's 10 minutes long. Just put my name, Huberman, and NSDR Just put my name, Huberman, and NSDR Just put my name, Huberman, and NSDR into the search browser on YouTube, and into the search browser on YouTube, and into the search browser on YouTube, and Virtusan has provided an NSDR that's Virtusan has provided an NSDR that's Virtusan has provided an NSDR that's completely zero cost and works very well completely zero cost and works very well completely zero cost and works very well for reducing stress. It will also help for reducing stress. It will also help for reducing stress. It will also help teach your system and teach you how to teach your system and teach you how to teach your system and teach you how to learn to fall asleep better at night. learn to fall asleep better at night. learn to fall asleep better at night. So, any of those practices, 5 to 10 So, any of those practices, 5 to 10 So, any of those practices, 5 to 10 minute breathing practice or meditation minute breathing practice or meditation minute breathing practice or meditation or a NSDR Yoga Nidra. If you can do longer, a NSDR Yoga Nidra. If you can do longer, a NSDR Yoga Nidra. If you can do longer, 20 or 30 minutes in the afternoon, 20 or 30 minutes in the afternoon, 20 or 30 minutes in the afternoon, that's known to buffer cortisol that's known to buffer cortisol that's known to buffer cortisol substantially as well. Anytime you're substantially as well. Anytime you're substantially as well. Anytime you're encountering stress in real time, I encountering stress in real time, I encountering stress in real time, I highly recommend a tool over and over highly recommend a tool over and over highly recommend a tool over and over because it's so effective, the fastest because it's so effective, the fastest because it's so effective, the fastest way we know to buffer stress and calm way we know to buffer stress and calm way we know to buffer stress and calm down is the so-called physiological down is the so-called physiological down is the so-called physiological sigh. Big inhale through the nose sigh. Big inhale through the nose sigh. Big inhale through the nose till your lungs are empty, but then till your lungs are empty, but then till your lungs are empty, but then sneak in a little bit more air by a sneak in a little bit more air by a sneak in a little bit more air by a second inhale. second inhale. second inhale. Maximally inflate the lungs, then a long Maximally inflate the lungs, then a long Maximally inflate the lungs, then a long exhale until your lungs are empty. One exhale until your lungs are empty. One exhale until your lungs are empty. One to three of those will reduce your to three of those will reduce your to three of those will reduce your stress substantially. Over time, that stress substantially. Over time, that stress substantially. Over time, that should reduce, that is, buffer your should reduce, that is, buffer your should reduce, that is, buffer your cortisol acting as an adaptogen. There cortisol acting as an adaptogen. There cortisol acting as an adaptogen. There are a lot of things. You can take a hot are a lot of things. You can take a hot are a lot of things. You can take a hot bath, you can take a hot shower, you can bath, you can take a hot shower, you can bath, you can take a hot shower, you can listen to some pleasant music, you know, listen to some pleasant music, you know, listen to some pleasant music, you know, anything that reduces your stress anything that reduces your stress anything that reduces your stress technically is an adaptogen. So, technically is an adaptogen. So, technically is an adaptogen. So, I hope I've thoroughly I answered your I hope I've thoroughly I answered your I hope I've thoroughly I answered your question. By yours, I mean this Of question. By yours, I mean this Of question. By yours, I mean this Of course, this answer is going out to all course, this answer is going out to all course, this answer is going out to all of you. This is a question that was of you. This is a question that was of you. This is a question that was asked by Justine Bevilacqua. I hope I asked by Justine Bevilacqua. I hope I asked by Justine Bevilacqua. I hope I pronounced that correctly, Justine. Um pronounced that correctly, Justine. Um pronounced that correctly, Justine. Um and thank you for that question. I think and thank you for that question. I think and thank you for that question. I think there are a lot of people interested in there are a lot of people interested in there are a lot of people interested in adaptogens. So, now you know you can use adaptogens. So, now you know you can use adaptogens. So, now you know you can use nutrition such as cruciferous nutrition such as cruciferous nutrition such as cruciferous vegetables, dark leafy greens, vegetables, dark leafy greens, vegetables, dark leafy greens, and I should also mention if you're not and I should also mention if you're not and I should also mention if you're not ingesting enough calories each day, ingesting enough calories each day, ingesting enough calories each day, well, then you are going to be in a mild well, then you are going to be in a mild well, then you are going to be in a mild mode of stress. mode of stress. mode of stress. That's not to say that some people That's not to say that some people That's not to say that some people shouldn't take in fewer calories than shouldn't take in fewer calories than shouldn't take in fewer calories than they burn in order to lose weight. Some they burn in order to lose weight. Some they burn in order to lose weight. Some people really need to do that for their people really need to do that for their people really need to do that for their health or for whatever other reason, but health or for whatever other reason, but health or for whatever other reason, but if you restrict calories too much, you if you restrict calories too much, you if you restrict calories too much, you are going to increase cortisol output. are going to increase cortisol output. are going to increase cortisol output. So, keep that in mind. So, keep that in mind. So, keep that in mind. So, ingest sufficient calories for you and ingest sufficient calories for you and ingest sufficient calories for you and for your goals. Aim to get dark leafy for your goals. Aim to get dark leafy for your goals. Aim to get dark leafy greens and vegetables. Don't greens and vegetables. Don't greens and vegetables. Don't overcook them. overcook them. overcook them. If you want to explore supplements, the If you want to explore supplements, the If you want to explore supplements, the best supplements that act as adaptogens best supplements that act as adaptogens best supplements that act as adaptogens are going to be ashwagandha, lion's are going to be ashwagandha, lion's are going to be ashwagandha, lion's mane, and chaga. mane, and chaga. mane, and chaga. One or two or three of those, although One or two or three of those, although One or two or three of those, although if you were going to pick one, I'd if you were going to pick one, I'd if you were going to pick one, I'd recommend ashwagandha at 600 mg per day recommend ashwagandha at 600 mg per day recommend ashwagandha at 600 mg per day taken in the later half of the day. And taken in the later half of the day. And taken in the later half of the day. And then there are the behavioral tools that then there are the behavioral tools that then there are the behavioral tools that we just talked about now, which are we just talked about now, which are we just talked about now, which are anything that reduces stress can reduce anything that reduces stress can reduce anything that reduces stress can reduce cortisol. And in doing so, are technically And in doing so, are technically And in doing so, are technically adaptogens. If you want to know more adaptogens. If you want to know more adaptogens. If you want to know more behavioral tools and other tools for behavioral tools and other tools for behavioral tools and other tools for adjusting stress and learn more about adjusting stress and learn more about adjusting stress and learn more about adaptogens, we did a whole episode adaptogens, we did a whole episode adaptogens, we did a whole episode called mastering stress. So, you can called mastering stress. So, you can called mastering stress. So, you can look to that at That episode also pretty look to that at That episode also pretty look to that at That episode also pretty clearly defines, I like to think, what clearly defines, I like to think, what clearly defines, I like to think, what short-term, medium-term, and long-term short-term, medium-term, and long-term short-term, medium-term, and long-term stress really are. Keep in mind stress really are. Keep in mind stress really are. Keep in mind stress is part of life. Learning how to work is part of life. Learning how to work is part of life. Learning how to work with it, how to dance with it, how to with it, how to dance with it, how to with it, how to dance with it, how to buffer it is terrific, but zeroing out buffer it is terrific, but zeroing out buffer it is terrific, but zeroing out cortisol is not the goal. The goal is to cortisol is not the goal. The goal is to cortisol is not the goal. The goal is to learn to modulate and control your learn to modulate and control your learn to modulate and control your cortisol, and that's really what cortisol, and that's really what cortisol, and that's really what adaptogens are all about. Thank you for adaptogens are all about. Thank you for adaptogens are all about. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me joining for the beginning of this Ask Me joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of episode and to hear future episodes of episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab Podcast standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which, of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which, of Huberman Lab Podcast channel, which, of course, will still be continued to be course, will still be continued to be course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab Podcast. And to fund research. In particular, And to fund research. In particular, And to fund research. In particular, research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree as a species which I think we all agree as a species which I think we all agree as a species that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance, and those health, and performance, and those health, and performance, and those protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give you information to your burning you information to your burning you information to your burning questions in-depth and allow you the questions in-depth and allow you the questions in-depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that channel. So, this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and further support research for science and further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll, of course, your questions, and you'll, of course, your questions, and you'll, of course, get answers to all the questions that get answers to all the questions that get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will other people ask as well. There will other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as also be some premium content, such as also be some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.