Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we continue our discussion of the Today, we continue our discussion of the Today, we continue our discussion of the senses. And the senses we are going to senses. And the senses we are going to senses. And the senses we are going to discuss are pain and pleasure. discuss are pain and pleasure. discuss are pain and pleasure. Pain and pleasure reflect two opposite Pain and pleasure reflect two opposite Pain and pleasure reflect two opposite ends of a continuum. A continuum that ends of a continuum. A continuum that ends of a continuum. A continuum that involves detection of things in our skin involves detection of things in our skin involves detection of things in our skin and the perception, the understanding of and the perception, the understanding of and the perception, the understanding of what those events are. what those events are. what those events are. Our skin is our largest sensory organ Our skin is our largest sensory organ Our skin is our largest sensory organ and our largest organ, indeed. It is and our largest organ, indeed. It is and our largest organ, indeed. It is much larger than any of the other organs much larger than any of the other organs much larger than any of the other organs in our body. in our body. in our body. And it's an odd organ, if you think And it's an odd organ, if you think And it's an odd organ, if you think about it. It has so many functions. It about it. It has so many functions. It about it. It has so many functions. It acts as a barrier between our organs and acts as a barrier between our organs and acts as a barrier between our organs and the outside world. the outside world. the outside world. It harbors neurons, nerve cells, that It harbors neurons, nerve cells, that It harbors neurons, nerve cells, that allow us to detect things like light allow us to detect things like light allow us to detect things like light touch or temperature or pressure of touch or temperature or pressure of touch or temperature or pressure of various kinds. And it's an organ that we various kinds. And it's an organ that we various kinds. And it's an organ that we hang ornaments on. People put earrings hang ornaments on. People put earrings hang ornaments on. People put earrings in their ears. People decorate their in their ears. People decorate their in their ears. People decorate their skin with tattoos and inks and other skin with tattoos and inks and other skin with tattoos and inks and other things. And it's an organ that allows us things. And it's an organ that allows us things. And it's an organ that allows us to experience either great pain or great to experience either great pain or great to experience either great pain or great pleasure. So, it's a multifaceted organ, pleasure. So, it's a multifaceted organ, pleasure. So, it's a multifaceted organ, and it's one that our brain needs to and it's one that our brain needs to and it's one that our brain needs to make sense of in a multifaceted way. I make sense of in a multifaceted way. I make sense of in a multifaceted way. I think we all intuitively understand what think we all intuitively understand what think we all intuitively understand what pleasure and pain are. pleasure and pain are. pleasure and pain are. Pleasure, generally, is a sensation in Pleasure, generally, is a sensation in Pleasure, generally, is a sensation in the body and in the mind that leads us the body and in the mind that leads us the body and in the mind that leads us to pursue more of whatever is bringing to pursue more of whatever is bringing to pursue more of whatever is bringing about that sensation. about that sensation. about that sensation. And pain is also a sensation in the body And pain is also a sensation in the body And pain is also a sensation in the body and in the mind that, in general, leads and in the mind that, in general, leads and in the mind that, in general, leads us to want to withdraw or move away from us to want to withdraw or move away from us to want to withdraw or move away from some activity or interaction. Scientists some activity or interaction. Scientists some activity or interaction. Scientists would call this appetitive behaviors, would call this appetitive behaviors, would call this appetitive behaviors, meaning behaviors that lead us to create meaning behaviors that lead us to create meaning behaviors that lead us to create an appetite for more of those behaviors, an appetite for more of those behaviors, an appetite for more of those behaviors, and aversive behaviors, behaviors that and aversive behaviors, behaviors that and aversive behaviors, behaviors that make us want to move away from make us want to move away from make us want to move away from something. The organ that we call the something. The organ that we call the something. The organ that we call the skin, as I mentioned earlier, is the skin, as I mentioned earlier, is the skin, as I mentioned earlier, is the largest organ in our body, and largest organ in our body, and largest organ in our body, and throughout that organ, we have neurons, throughout that organ, we have neurons, throughout that organ, we have neurons, little nerve cells. Now, to be really little nerve cells. Now, to be really little nerve cells. Now, to be really technical about it, and the way I'd like technical about it, and the way I'd like technical about it, and the way I'd like you to understand it, is that the you to understand it, is that the you to understand it, is that the so-called cell body, meaning the so-called cell body, meaning the so-called cell body, meaning the location of a cell in which the DNA and location of a cell in which the DNA and location of a cell in which the DNA and other goodies, the kind of central other goodies, the kind of central other goodies, the kind of central factory of the cell, that actually sits factory of the cell, that actually sits factory of the cell, that actually sits right outside your spinal cord. So, all right outside your spinal cord. So, all right outside your spinal cord. So, all up and down your spinal cord, on either up and down your spinal cord, on either up and down your spinal cord, on either side, are these little blobs of neurons, side, are these little blobs of neurons, side, are these little blobs of neurons, little collections of neurons. They're little collections of neurons. They're little collections of neurons. They're called DRGs, called DRGs, called DRGs, dorsal root ganglia. A ganglion is just dorsal root ganglia. A ganglion is just dorsal root ganglia. A ganglion is just a collection or a clump of cells. a collection or a clump of cells. a collection or a clump of cells. And those DRGs are really interesting And those DRGs are really interesting And those DRGs are really interesting because they send one branch that we because they send one branch that we because they send one branch that we call an axon, a little wire, out to our call an axon, a little wire, out to our call an axon, a little wire, out to our skin, and they have another wire from skin, and they have another wire from skin, and they have another wire from that same cell body that goes in the that same cell body that goes in the that same cell body that goes in the opposite direction, which is up to our opposite direction, which is up to our opposite direction, which is up to our brain, and creates connections within brain, and creates connections within brain, and creates connections within our brain in the so-called brainstem. our brain in the so-called brainstem. our brain in the so-called brainstem. Okay? These wires are positioned within Okay? These wires are positioned within Okay? These wires are positioned within the skin to respond to mechanical the skin to respond to mechanical the skin to respond to mechanical forces. So, maybe light touch, some will forces. So, maybe light touch, some will forces. So, maybe light touch, some will only send electrical activity up toward only send electrical activity up toward only send electrical activity up toward the brain in response to light touch. the brain in response to light touch. the brain in response to light touch. Others respond to coarse pressure, to Others respond to coarse pressure, to Others respond to coarse pressure, to hard pressure, but they won't respond to hard pressure, but they won't respond to hard pressure, but they won't respond to a light feather. Others respond to a light feather. Others respond to a light feather. Others respond to temperature. So, they will respond to temperature. So, they will respond to temperature. So, they will respond to the presence of heat or the presence of the presence of heat or the presence of the presence of heat or the presence of cold, and still others respond to other cold, and still others respond to other cold, and still others respond to other types of stimuli, like certain chemicals types of stimuli, like certain chemicals types of stimuli, like certain chemicals on our skin. So, these neurons are on our skin. So, these neurons are on our skin. So, these neurons are amazing. They're collecting information amazing. They're collecting information amazing. They're collecting information of particular kinds from the skin of particular kinds from the skin of particular kinds from the skin throughout the entire body, and sending throughout the entire body, and sending throughout the entire body, and sending that information up toward the brain. that information up toward the brain. that information up toward the brain. And what's really incredible, I just And what's really incredible, I just And what's really incredible, I just want you to ponder this for a second, want you to ponder this for a second, want you to ponder this for a second, what's really incredible is that the what's really incredible is that the what's really incredible is that the language that those neurons use is language that those neurons use is language that those neurons use is exactly the same. The neuron that exactly the same. The neuron that exactly the same. The neuron that responds to light touch sends electrical responds to light touch sends electrical responds to light touch sends electrical signals up toward the brain. The neurons signals up toward the brain. The neurons signals up toward the brain. The neurons that respond to cold or to heat or to that respond to cold or to heat or to that respond to cold or to heat or to habanero pepper, habanero pepper, habanero pepper, they only respond to the particular they only respond to the particular they only respond to the particular thing that thing that thing that evokes the electrical response. I should evokes the electrical response. I should evokes the electrical response. I should say that they only respond to the say that they only respond to the say that they only respond to the particular stimulus, the pepper, the particular stimulus, the pepper, the particular stimulus, the pepper, the cold, the heat, etc., that will evoke an cold, the heat, etc., that will evoke an cold, the heat, etc., that will evoke an electrical signal. electrical signal. electrical signal. But the electrical signals are a common But the electrical signals are a common But the electrical signals are a common language that all neurons use. And yet, language that all neurons use. And yet, language that all neurons use. And yet, if something cold is presented to your if something cold is presented to your if something cold is presented to your skin like an ice cube, you know that skin like an ice cube, you know that skin like an ice cube, you know that sensation, that thing is cold. You that sensation, that thing is cold. You that sensation, that thing is cold. You don't misperceive it as heat or as a don't misperceive it as heat or as a don't misperceive it as heat or as a habanero pepper. Okay? So, that's habanero pepper. Okay? So, that's habanero pepper. Okay? So, that's amazing. What that means is that there amazing. What that means is that there amazing. What that means is that there must be another element in the equation must be another element in the equation must be another element in the equation of what creates pleasure or pain. And of what creates pleasure or pain. And of what creates pleasure or pain. And that element is your brain. that element is your brain. that element is your brain. Your brain takes these electrical Your brain takes these electrical Your brain takes these electrical signals and interprets them. signals and interprets them. signals and interprets them. Partially based on experience, but also Partially based on experience, but also Partially based on experience, but also there are some innate, meaning some there are some innate, meaning some there are some innate, meaning some hardwired, aspects of pain and pleasure sensing aspects of pain and pleasure sensing aspects of pain and pleasure sensing that require no experience whatsoever. A that require no experience whatsoever. A that require no experience whatsoever. A child doesn't have to touch a flame but child doesn't have to touch a flame but child doesn't have to touch a flame but once and the very first time they will once and the very first time they will once and the very first time they will withdraw their hand from the flame. The withdraw their hand from the flame. The withdraw their hand from the flame. The pain and pleasure system don't need pain and pleasure system don't need pain and pleasure system don't need prior experience. prior experience. prior experience. What they need is a brain that can What they need is a brain that can What they need is a brain that can interpret these signals and somehow interpret these signals and somehow interpret these signals and somehow create what we call pleasure and pain create what we call pleasure and pain create what we call pleasure and pain out of them. out of them. out of them. So, what parts of the brain? Well, So, what parts of the brain? Well, So, what parts of the brain? Well, mainly it's the so-called somatosensory mainly it's the so-called somatosensory mainly it's the so-called somatosensory cortex, the portion of our neocortex, cortex, the portion of our neocortex, cortex, the portion of our neocortex, which is on the outside of our brain, which is on the outside of our brain, which is on the outside of our brain, the kind of bumpy part. the kind of bumpy part. the kind of bumpy part. And in your somatosensory cortex, you have a in your somatosensory cortex, you have a in your somatosensory cortex, you have a map of your entire body surface. That map of your entire body surface. That map of your entire body surface. That map is called a homunculus. It's your map is called a homunculus. It's your map is called a homunculus. It's your representation of touch including representation of touch including representation of touch including pleasure and pain. pleasure and pain. pleasure and pain. But, it's not randomly organized. It's But, it's not randomly organized. It's But, it's not randomly organized. It's highly organized in a very particular highly organized in a very particular highly organized in a very particular way. Which is that the areas of your skin Which is that the areas of your skin Which is that the areas of your skin that have the highest density of these that have the highest density of these that have the highest density of these sensory receptors sensory receptors sensory receptors are magnified in your brain. are magnified in your brain. are magnified in your brain. What are the areas that are magnified? What are the areas that are magnified? What are the areas that are magnified? Well, the lips, the face, the tips of the lips, the face, the tips of the lips, the face, the tips of the fingers, the feet, and the genitals. fingers, the feet, and the genitals. fingers, the feet, and the genitals. And that's because the innervation, the And that's because the innervation, the And that's because the innervation, the number of wires that go into those number of wires that go into those number of wires that go into those regions of your body far exceeds the regions of your body far exceeds the regions of your body far exceeds the number of wires for sensation of touch number of wires for sensation of touch number of wires for sensation of touch that go to other areas of your body. that go to other areas of your body. that go to other areas of your body. You can actually experience this in real You can actually experience this in real You can actually experience this in real time right now by doing a simple time right now by doing a simple time right now by doing a simple experiment that we call two-point experiment that we call two-point experiment that we call two-point discrimination. Two-point discrimination is your ability Two-point discrimination is your ability Two-point discrimination is your ability to know whether or not two points of to know whether or not two points of to know whether or not two points of pressure are far apart, near each other, or are far apart, near each other, or are far apart, near each other, or you actually could perceive incorrectly you actually could perceive incorrectly you actually could perceive incorrectly as one point of pressure. as one point of pressure. as one point of pressure. You might want a second person to do You might want a second person to do You might want a second person to do this experiment. That person would take this experiment. That person would take this experiment. That person would take two fine points, so it could be two fine points, so it could be two fine points, so it could be two pencils or pens or the backs of pens. If pencils or pens or the backs of pens. If pencils or pens or the backs of pens. If you were to close your eyes and I were you were to close your eyes and I were you were to close your eyes and I were to take these two pens and put their to take these two pens and put their to take these two pens and put their points close together about a centimeter points close together about a centimeter points close together about a centimeter apart and present them to the top of apart and present them to the top of apart and present them to the top of your hand, you, even though your eyes your hand, you, even though your eyes your hand, you, even though your eyes were closed, you would be able to were closed, you would be able to were closed, you would be able to perceive that was two points of perceive that was two points of perceive that was two points of pressure presented simultaneously to the pressure presented simultaneously to the pressure presented simultaneously to the top of your hand. top of your hand. top of your hand. However, if I were to do this to the However, if I were to do this to the However, if I were to do this to the middle of your back, you would not middle of your back, you would not middle of your back, you would not experience them as two points of experience them as two points of experience them as two points of pressure. You would experience them as pressure. You would experience them as pressure. You would experience them as one single point of pressure. In other one single point of pressure. In other one single point of pressure. In other words, your two-point discrimination is words, your two-point discrimination is words, your two-point discrimination is better, is higher better, is higher better, is higher on areas of your body which have many, on areas of your body which have many, on areas of your body which have many, many more sensory receptors. Most of us many more sensory receptors. Most of us many more sensory receptors. Most of us don't really appreciate how important don't really appreciate how important don't really appreciate how important and what a profound influence this and what a profound influence this and what a profound influence this change in density of receptors across change in density of receptors across change in density of receptors across our body surface has. So, you've got our body surface has. So, you've got our body surface has. So, you've got sensors in the skin and you've got a sensors in the skin and you've got a sensors in the skin and you've got a brain that's going to interpret what's brain that's going to interpret what's brain that's going to interpret what's going on with those sensors. going on with those sensors. going on with those sensors. And believe it or not, your subjective And believe it or not, your subjective And believe it or not, your subjective interpretation of what's happening has a interpretation of what's happening has a interpretation of what's happening has a profound influence profound influence profound influence on your experience of pleasure or pain. on your experience of pleasure or pain. on your experience of pleasure or pain. There's several things that can impact There's several things that can impact There's several things that can impact these experiences, but the main these experiences, but the main these experiences, but the main categories are categories are categories are expectation. If someone tells you this is going to If someone tells you this is going to If someone tells you this is going to hurt, I'm going to, you know, give you hurt, I'm going to, you know, give you hurt, I'm going to, you know, give you an injection right here, it might hurt an injection right here, it might hurt an injection right here, it might hurt for a second, that's very different and for a second, that's very different and for a second, that's very different and your experience of that pain will be your experience of that pain will be your experience of that pain will be very different than if it happens very different than if it happens very different than if it happens suddenly out of the blue. suddenly out of the blue. suddenly out of the blue. There's also anxiety, how anxious or how There's also anxiety, how anxious or how There's also anxiety, how anxious or how high or low your level of arousal, high or low your level of arousal, high or low your level of arousal, autonomic arousal. autonomic arousal. autonomic arousal. That's going to impact your experience That's going to impact your experience That's going to impact your experience of pleasure or pain. of pleasure or pain. of pleasure or pain. How well you slept How well you slept How well you slept and where you are in the so-called and where you are in the so-called and where you are in the so-called circadian or 24-hour cycle. circadian or 24-hour cycle. circadian or 24-hour cycle. Our ability to tolerate pain changes Our ability to tolerate pain changes Our ability to tolerate pain changes dramatically across the 24-hour cycle. dramatically across the 24-hour cycle. dramatically across the 24-hour cycle. And as you can imagine, it's during the And as you can imagine, it's during the And as you can imagine, it's during the daylight waking hours that we are better daylight waking hours that we are better daylight waking hours that we are better able to tolerate, we are more resilient able to tolerate, we are more resilient able to tolerate, we are more resilient to pain, and we are better able to pain, and we are better able to pain, and we are better able to experience pleasure. At night, our experience pleasure. At night, our experience pleasure. At night, our threshold for pain is much lower. threshold for pain is much lower. threshold for pain is much lower. In other words, the amount of mechanical In other words, the amount of mechanical In other words, the amount of mechanical or chemical or thermal, meaning or chemical or thermal, meaning or chemical or thermal, meaning temperature, stimuli that can evoke a temperature, stimuli that can evoke a temperature, stimuli that can evoke a pain response and how we would rate that pain response and how we would rate that pain response and how we would rate that response is response is response is much lower at night and in particular in much lower at night and in particular in much lower at night and in particular in the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. if you're on a kind of standard a.m. if you're on a kind of standard a.m. if you're on a kind of standard circadian schedule. circadian schedule. circadian schedule. And then the last one is our genes. And then the last one is our genes. And then the last one is our genes. Pain threshold and how long a pain Pain threshold and how long a pain Pain threshold and how long a pain response lasts is in part dictated by response lasts is in part dictated by response lasts is in part dictated by our genes. our genes. our genes. So, we have expectation, anxiety, how So, we have expectation, anxiety, how So, we have expectation, anxiety, how well we've slept, where we are in the well we've slept, where we are in the well we've slept, where we are in the so-called 24-hour circadian time, and so-called 24-hour circadian time, and so-called 24-hour circadian time, and our genes. our genes. our genes. So, let's talk about expectation and So, let's talk about expectation and So, let's talk about expectation and anxiety because those two factors can anxiety because those two factors can anxiety because those two factors can powerfully modulate our experience of powerfully modulate our experience of powerfully modulate our experience of both pleasure and pain in ways that will both pleasure and pain in ways that will both pleasure and pain in ways that will allow us to dial up pleasure if we like allow us to dial up pleasure if we like allow us to dial up pleasure if we like and to dial down pain if indeed that's and to dial down pain if indeed that's and to dial down pain if indeed that's what we want to do. So, let's talk about what we want to do. So, let's talk about what we want to do. So, let's talk about expectation and anxiety because those expectation and anxiety because those expectation and anxiety because those two things are somewhat tethered. two things are somewhat tethered. two things are somewhat tethered. There are now a number of solid There are now a number of solid There are now a number of solid experiments that point to the fact that experiments that point to the fact that experiments that point to the fact that if we know a painful stimulus is coming if we know a painful stimulus is coming if we know a painful stimulus is coming that we can better prepare for it that we can better prepare for it that we can better prepare for it mentally and therefore buffer or reduce mentally and therefore buffer or reduce mentally and therefore buffer or reduce the pain response. Essentially, if the pain response. Essentially, if the pain response. Essentially, if subjects are warned that a painful subjects are warned that a painful subjects are warned that a painful stimulus is coming stimulus is coming stimulus is coming their subjective experience of that pain their subjective experience of that pain their subjective experience of that pain is vastly reduced. is vastly reduced. is vastly reduced. However, if they are warned just 2 However, if they are warned just 2 However, if they are warned just 2 seconds before that pain arrives seconds before that pain arrives seconds before that pain arrives it does not help. It actually makes it does not help. It actually makes it does not help. It actually makes it worse. And the reason is they can't do worse. And the reason is they can't do worse. And the reason is they can't do anything mentally to prepare for it in anything mentally to prepare for it in anything mentally to prepare for it in that brief 2-second window. that brief 2-second window. that brief 2-second window. Similarly, if they are warned about pain Similarly, if they are warned about pain Similarly, if they are warned about pain that's coming 2 minutes before a painful that's coming 2 minutes before a painful that's coming 2 minutes before a painful stimulus is coming, that also makes it stimulus is coming, that also makes it stimulus is coming, that also makes it worse because their expectation ramps up worse because their expectation ramps up worse because their expectation ramps up the autonomic arousal, the level of the autonomic arousal, the level of the autonomic arousal, the level of alertness is all funneled toward that alertness is all funneled toward that alertness is all funneled toward that negative experience that's coming. negative experience that's coming. negative experience that's coming. So, how soon before a painful stimulus So, how soon before a painful stimulus So, how soon before a painful stimulus should we know about it if the goal is should we know about it if the goal is should we know about it if the goal is to reduce our level of pain? And the to reduce our level of pain? And the to reduce our level of pain? And the answer is somewhere between 20 seconds answer is somewhere between 20 seconds answer is somewhere between 20 seconds and 40 seconds is about right. This can and 40 seconds is about right. This can and 40 seconds is about right. This can come in useful in a variety of contexts, come in useful in a variety of contexts, come in useful in a variety of contexts, but I think it's important because what but I think it's important because what but I think it's important because what it illustrates is that it absolutely it illustrates is that it absolutely it illustrates is that it absolutely cannot be just the pattern of signals cannot be just the pattern of signals cannot be just the pattern of signals that are arriving from the skin. There that are arriving from the skin. There that are arriving from the skin. There has to be a subjective interpretation has to be a subjective interpretation has to be a subjective interpretation component. Because we are all different component. Because we are all different component. Because we are all different in terms of our pain threshold. First of in terms of our pain threshold. First of in terms of our pain threshold. First of all, what is pain threshold? Pain all, what is pain threshold? Pain all, what is pain threshold? Pain threshold has two dimensions. The first threshold has two dimensions. The first threshold has two dimensions. The first dimension is dimension is dimension is the amount of mechanical or chemical or the amount of mechanical or chemical or the amount of mechanical or chemical or thermal stimulation that it takes for thermal stimulation that it takes for thermal stimulation that it takes for you or me or somebody else to say, "I you or me or somebody else to say, "I you or me or somebody else to say, "I can't take that anymore. I'm done." can't take that anymore. I'm done." can't take that anymore. I'm done." But there's another element as well, But there's another element as well, But there's another element as well, which is how long the pain persists. And which is how long the pain persists. And which is how long the pain persists. And to just really point out how varied we to just really point out how varied we to just really point out how varied we all are in terms of our experience of all are in terms of our experience of all are in terms of our experience of pain, let's look to an experiment. pain, let's look to an experiment. pain, let's look to an experiment. There have been experiments done at There have been experiments done at There have been experiments done at Stanford School of Medicine and Stanford School of Medicine and Stanford School of Medicine and elsewhere which involved having subjects put their which involved having subjects put their which involved having subjects put their hand into a very cold vat of water and hand into a very cold vat of water and hand into a very cold vat of water and measuring the amount of time that they measuring the amount of time that they measuring the amount of time that they kept their hand in that water, and then kept their hand in that water, and then kept their hand in that water, and then they would tell the experimenter how they would tell the experimenter how they would tell the experimenter how painful that particular stimulus was on painful that particular stimulus was on painful that particular stimulus was on a scale of 1 to 10. That simple a scale of 1 to 10. That simple a scale of 1 to 10. That simple experiment revealed that people experiment revealed that people experiment revealed that people experience the same thermal, in this experience the same thermal, in this experience the same thermal, in this case cold, stimulus case cold, stimulus case cold, stimulus vastly different. Some people would rate vastly different. Some people would rate vastly different. Some people would rate it as a 10 out of 10, extreme pain. it as a 10 out of 10, extreme pain. it as a 10 out of 10, extreme pain. Other people would rate it as barely Other people would rate it as barely Other people would rate it as barely painful at all, like a one. Other painful at all, like a one. Other painful at all, like a one. Other people, a three. Other people, a five, people, a three. Other people, a five, people, a three. Other people, a five, et cetera. In fact, there is no et cetera. In fact, there is no et cetera. In fact, there is no objective measure of pain. objective measure of pain. objective measure of pain. Similarly, pleasure is something that we Similarly, pleasure is something that we Similarly, pleasure is something that we all talk about, but we have no way of all talk about, but we have no way of all talk about, but we have no way of gauging what other people are gauging what other people are gauging what other people are experiencing except what they report experiencing except what they report experiencing except what they report through language. So rather than focus through language. So rather than focus through language. So rather than focus on just the subjective nature of pain, on just the subjective nature of pain, on just the subjective nature of pain, let's talk about the absolute qualities let's talk about the absolute qualities let's talk about the absolute qualities of pain of pain of pain and the absolute qualities of pleasure and the absolute qualities of pleasure and the absolute qualities of pleasure so that we can learn how to navigate so that we can learn how to navigate so that we can learn how to navigate those two experiences in ways that serve those two experiences in ways that serve those two experiences in ways that serve us each better. us each better. us each better. First of all, I want to talk about heat First of all, I want to talk about heat First of all, I want to talk about heat and cold. and cold. and cold. We do indeed have sensors in our skin We do indeed have sensors in our skin We do indeed have sensors in our skin that respond to heat and cold. And one that respond to heat and cold. And one that respond to heat and cold. And one of the best tests of how somebody can of the best tests of how somebody can of the best tests of how somebody can handle pain is to ask them to just get handle pain is to ask them to just get handle pain is to ask them to just get into an ice bath. Some do it quickly. into an ice bath. Some do it quickly. into an ice bath. Some do it quickly. Some do it slowly. Some do it slowly. Some do it slowly. Others find the experience of cold to be so find the experience of cold to be so find the experience of cold to be so aversive that they somehow cannot get aversive that they somehow cannot get aversive that they somehow cannot get themselves in. I think it can be helpful themselves in. I think it can be helpful themselves in. I think it can be helpful to everyone to know that even though it to everyone to know that even though it to everyone to know that even though it feels better at a mental level to get feels better at a mental level to get feels better at a mental level to get into the cold slowly, it is actually into the cold slowly, it is actually into the cold slowly, it is actually much worse from a neurobiological much worse from a neurobiological much worse from a neurobiological perspective. The neurons that sense cold respond to The neurons that sense cold respond to The neurons that sense cold respond to what are called relative drops in what are called relative drops in what are called relative drops in temperature. So, it's not about the absolute So, it's not about the absolute So, it's not about the absolute temperature of the water, it's about the temperature of the water, it's about the temperature of the water, it's about the relative change in temperature. relative change in temperature. relative change in temperature. Therefore, you can bypass these signals Therefore, you can bypass these signals Therefore, you can bypass these signals going up to the brain with each relative going up to the brain with each relative going up to the brain with each relative change, 1° change, 2° change, etc. change, 1° change, 2° change, etc. change, 1° change, 2° change, etc. by simply getting in all at once. In by simply getting in all at once. In by simply getting in all at once. In fact, it is true that if you get into fact, it is true that if you get into fact, it is true that if you get into cold water up to your neck, it's cold water up to your neck, it's cold water up to your neck, it's actually much more comfortable than if actually much more comfortable than if actually much more comfortable than if you're halfway in and halfway out. And you're halfway in and halfway out. And you're halfway in and halfway out. And that's because of the difference in the that's because of the difference in the that's because of the difference in the signals that are being sent from the signals that are being sent from the signals that are being sent from the cold receptors on your upper torso, cold receptors on your upper torso, cold receptors on your upper torso, which is out of the water, and your which is out of the water, and your which is out of the water, and your lower torso. Now, I wouldn't want anyone lower torso. Now, I wouldn't want anyone lower torso. Now, I wouldn't want anyone to take this to mean that they should to take this to mean that they should to take this to mean that they should just jump into an unknown body of water. just jump into an unknown body of water. just jump into an unknown body of water. People can have heart attacks from People can have heart attacks from People can have heart attacks from getting into extremely cold water. But getting into extremely cold water. But getting into extremely cold water. But it's absolutely true that provided it's absolutely true that provided it's absolutely true that provided it's safe, getting into a safe, getting into a safe, getting into a cold water is always going to be easier cold water is always going to be easier cold water is always going to be easier to do quickly and it's going to be to do quickly and it's going to be to do quickly and it's going to be easier to do up to your neck. Now, heat easier to do up to your neck. Now, heat easier to do up to your neck. Now, heat is the opposite. Heat is measured in is the opposite. Heat is measured in is the opposite. Heat is measured in absolute terms by the neurons. So, absolute terms by the neurons. So, absolute terms by the neurons. So, gradually moving into heat makes sense gradually moving into heat makes sense gradually moving into heat makes sense and finding that threshold which is safe and finding that threshold which is safe and finding that threshold which is safe and comfortable for you, or if it's and comfortable for you, or if it's and comfortable for you, or if it's uncomfortable, at least resides within uncomfortable, at least resides within uncomfortable, at least resides within that realm of safety. that realm of safety. that realm of safety. One of the most important things to One of the most important things to One of the most important things to understand about the experience of pain understand about the experience of pain understand about the experience of pain and to really illustrate just how and to really illustrate just how and to really illustrate just how subjective pain really is subjective pain really is subjective pain really is that our experience of pain and the is that our experience of pain and the is that our experience of pain and the degree of damage to our body are not degree of damage to our body are not degree of damage to our body are not always correlated. A classic example of always correlated. A classic example of always correlated. A classic example of this was published in the British this was published in the British this was published in the British Journal of Medicine in which a Journal of Medicine in which a Journal of Medicine in which a construction worker fell from I think it construction worker fell from I think it construction worker fell from I think it was a second story which he was working. was a second story which he was working. was a second story which he was working. And a nail went up and through his boot. a nail went up and through his boot. a nail went up and through his boot. And he looked down and he saw the nail And he looked down and he saw the nail And he looked down and he saw the nail going through his boot and he was in going through his boot and he was in going through his boot and he was in absolute excruciating pain. absolute excruciating pain. absolute excruciating pain. They took him to the hospital They took him to the hospital They took him to the hospital and because the nail was so long and because the nail was so long and because the nail was so long and because of where it had entered and because of where it had entered and because of where it had entered and exited the boot, they had to cut away exited the boot, they had to cut away exited the boot, they had to cut away the boot in order to get to the nail. the boot in order to get to the nail. the boot in order to get to the nail. And when they did that, they revealed And when they did that, they revealed And when they did that, they revealed that the nail had passed between two of that the nail had passed between two of that the nail had passed between two of his toes. It had actually his toes. It had actually his toes. It had actually failed to impale his body in any way. failed to impale his body in any way. failed to impale his body in any way. And yet the view, the perception of that And yet the view, the perception of that And yet the view, the perception of that nail entering his boot at one end nail entering his boot at one end nail entering his boot at one end and exiting the boot at the other was and exiting the boot at the other was and exiting the boot at the other was sufficient to create the experience of a sufficient to create the experience of a sufficient to create the experience of a nail that had gone through his foot. And nail that had gone through his foot. And nail that had gone through his foot. And the moment he realized that nail the moment he realized that nail the moment he realized that nail had not gone through his foot, the pain had not gone through his foot, the pain had not gone through his foot, the pain completely evaporated. And I want to completely evaporated. And I want to completely evaporated. And I want to make sure that I emphasize the so-called make sure that I emphasize the so-called make sure that I emphasize the so-called psychosomatic phenomenon. I think psychosomatic phenomenon. I think psychosomatic phenomenon. I think sometimes we hear psychosomatic and we sometimes we hear psychosomatic and we sometimes we hear psychosomatic and we interpret that as meaning all in one's interpret that as meaning all in one's interpret that as meaning all in one's head, but I think it's important to head, but I think it's important to head, but I think it's important to remember that everything is neural, remember that everything is neural, remember that everything is neural, whether or not it's pain in your body whether or not it's pain in your body whether or not it's pain in your body cuz you have a gaping wound and you're cuz you have a gaping wound and you're cuz you have a gaping wound and you're hemorrhaging out of that wound or hemorrhaging out of that wound or hemorrhaging out of that wound or whether or not it's pain for which you whether or not it's pain for which you whether or not it's pain for which you cannot explain it on the basis of any cannot explain it on the basis of any cannot explain it on the basis of any kind of injury, it's all neural. So kind of injury, it's all neural. So kind of injury, it's all neural. So saying body, brain or psychosomatic, saying body, brain or psychosomatic, saying body, brain or psychosomatic, it's kind of irrelevant and I hope it's kind of irrelevant and I hope it's kind of irrelevant and I hope someday we move past that language. So someday we move past that language. So someday we move past that language. So when we hear syndrome when we hear syndrome when we hear syndrome and a patient comes into a clinic and a patient comes into a clinic and a patient comes into a clinic and says that they suffer for instance from says that they suffer for instance from says that they suffer for instance from something which is very controversial something which is very controversial something which is very controversial frankly, like chronic fatigue syndrome, frankly, like chronic fatigue syndrome, frankly, like chronic fatigue syndrome, some physicians believe that it reflects some physicians believe that it reflects some physicians believe that it reflects a real underlying medical condition, a real underlying medical condition, a real underlying medical condition, others don't. others don't. others don't. However, syndrome means we don't However, syndrome means we don't However, syndrome means we don't understand. And that doesn't mean something doesn't And that doesn't mean something doesn't And that doesn't mean something doesn't exist. Fibromyalgia, or whole body pain for a Fibromyalgia, or whole body pain for a Fibromyalgia, or whole body pain for a long time, long time, long time, was written off or kind of explained was written off or kind of explained was written off or kind of explained away by physicians and scientists, away by physicians and scientists, away by physicians and scientists, frankly, my community, frankly, my community, frankly, my community, as one of these syndromes. It couldn't as one of these syndromes. It couldn't as one of these syndromes. It couldn't be explained. However, now there is firm be explained. However, now there is firm be explained. However, now there is firm understanding of at least one of the understanding of at least one of the understanding of at least one of the bases for this whole body pain. bases for this whole body pain. bases for this whole body pain. And that's And that's And that's activation of a particular cell type activation of a particular cell type activation of a particular cell type called glia. called glia. called glia. And there's a receptor on these glia, And there's a receptor on these glia, And there's a receptor on these glia, for those of you that want to know, for those of you that want to know, for those of you that want to know, called the toll-4 receptor. called the toll-4 receptor. called the toll-4 receptor. And activation of the toll-4 receptor is And activation of the toll-4 receptor is And activation of the toll-4 receptor is related to certain forms of whole body related to certain forms of whole body related to certain forms of whole body pain and fibromyalgia. pain and fibromyalgia. pain and fibromyalgia. Now, what treatments exist for Now, what treatments exist for Now, what treatments exist for fibromyalgia? There are clinical data using a There are clinical data using a There are clinical data using a prescription drug. prescription drug. prescription drug. The drug is called naltrexone. The drug is called naltrexone. The drug is called naltrexone. Naltrexone is actually used for the Naltrexone is actually used for the Naltrexone is actually used for the treatment of various treatment of various treatment of various uh opioid addictions and things of that uh opioid addictions and things of that uh opioid addictions and things of that sort. But it turns out that a very low sort. But it turns out that a very low sort. But it turns out that a very low dose has been shown to have some success dose has been shown to have some success dose has been shown to have some success in dealing with and treating certain in dealing with and treating certain in dealing with and treating certain forms of fibromyalgia. And it has that forms of fibromyalgia. And it has that forms of fibromyalgia. And it has that success because of its ability to bind success because of its ability to bind success because of its ability to bind to and block these toll-4 receptors on to and block these toll-4 receptors on to and block these toll-4 receptors on glia. There's another approach that one glia. There's another approach that one glia. There's another approach that one could take, and that compound is could take, and that compound is could take, and that compound is acetyl-L-carnitine. There is evidence that There is evidence that There is evidence that acetyl-L-carnitine can reduce the symptoms of chronic whole can reduce the symptoms of chronic whole can reduce the symptoms of chronic whole body pain and other certain forms of body pain and other certain forms of body pain and other certain forms of acute pain acute pain acute pain at dosages of somewhere between 1 to 3 at dosages of somewhere between 1 to 3 at dosages of somewhere between 1 to 3 and sometimes 4 g per day. and sometimes 4 g per day. and sometimes 4 g per day. Now, acetyl-L-carnitine can be taken Now, acetyl-L-carnitine can be taken Now, acetyl-L-carnitine can be taken orally. It's found in 500-mg capsules, orally. It's found in 500-mg capsules, orally. It's found in 500-mg capsules, as well as by injection. There are a as well as by injection. There are a as well as by injection. There are a large number of studies on large number of studies on large number of studies on acetyl-L-carnitine. You can look those acetyl-L-carnitine. You can look those acetyl-L-carnitine. You can look those up on PubMed, if you like, or on up on PubMed, if you like, or on up on PubMed, if you like, or on examine.com. So, it appears that L-carnitine is So, it appears that L-carnitine is So, it appears that L-carnitine is impacting a number of different impacting a number of different impacting a number of different processes both to impact pain and processes both to impact pain and processes both to impact pain and perhaps, and I want to underscore perhaps, and I want to underscore perhaps, and I want to underscore perhaps, but there are good studies perhaps, but there are good studies perhaps, but there are good studies happening now. happening now. happening now. Perhaps accelerate wound healing as Perhaps accelerate wound healing as Perhaps accelerate wound healing as well. Now, I'd like to turn our well. Now, I'd like to turn our well. Now, I'd like to turn our attention to a completely non-drug, attention to a completely non-drug, attention to a completely non-drug, non-supplement related approach to non-supplement related approach to non-supplement related approach to dealing with pain. dealing with pain. dealing with pain. And it's one that has existed for And it's one that has existed for And it's one that has existed for thousands of years thousands of years thousands of years and that only recently has the Western and that only recently has the Western and that only recently has the Western scientific community started to pay scientific community started to pay scientific community started to pay serious attention to. serious attention to. serious attention to. And there is terrific mechanistic And there is terrific mechanistic And there is terrific mechanistic science to now explain how and why science to now explain how and why science to now explain how and why acupuncture can work very well for the acupuncture can work very well for the acupuncture can work very well for the treatment of certain forms of pain. treatment of certain forms of pain. treatment of certain forms of pain. Now, first off, I want to tell you what Now, first off, I want to tell you what Now, first off, I want to tell you what was told to me by our director or chief was told to me by our director or chief was told to me by our director or chief of the pain division at Stanford School of the pain division at Stanford School of the pain division at Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Sean Mackey, which was of Medicine, Dr. Sean Mackey, which was of Medicine, Dr. Sean Mackey, which was that a fraction of people experience that a fraction of people experience that a fraction of people experience tremendous pain relief from acupuncture tremendous pain relief from acupuncture tremendous pain relief from acupuncture and others experience none at all or and others experience none at all or and others experience none at all or very little. A number of laboratories very little. A number of laboratories very little. A number of laboratories have started to explore how acupuncture have started to explore how acupuncture have started to explore how acupuncture works. And one of the premier for this works. And one of the premier for this works. And one of the premier for this is Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical is Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical is Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School. Now, the form of acupuncture that they Now, the form of acupuncture that they Now, the form of acupuncture that they explored was one that's commonly in use explored was one that's commonly in use explored was one that's commonly in use called electroacupuncture. So, this called electroacupuncture. So, this called electroacupuncture. So, this isn't just putting little needles into isn't just putting little needles into isn't just putting little needles into different parts of the body. different parts of the body. different parts of the body. These needles are able to pass an These needles are able to pass an These needles are able to pass an electrical current, not magically, but electrical current, not magically, but electrical current, not magically, but because they have a little wire going because they have a little wire going because they have a little wire going back to a device and you can pass back to a device and you can pass back to a device and you can pass electrical current. So, what Chufu Ma's electrical current. So, what Chufu Ma's electrical current. So, what Chufu Ma's lab found was that if electroacupuncture lab found was that if electroacupuncture lab found was that if electroacupuncture is provided to the abdomen, to the is provided to the abdomen, to the is provided to the abdomen, to the stomach area, stomach area, stomach area, it creates activation of what are called it creates activation of what are called it creates activation of what are called the sympathetic ganglia. And the sympathetic ganglia. And the sympathetic ganglia. And the activation of these neurons involves activation of these neurons involves activation of these neurons involves noradrenaline and something called NPY, neuropeptide Y. something called NPY, neuropeptide Y. something called NPY, neuropeptide Y. The long and short of it is that The long and short of it is that The long and short of it is that stimulating the abdomen with stimulating the abdomen with stimulating the abdomen with electroacupuncture was either anti-inflammatory was either anti-inflammatory was either anti-inflammatory or it could cause inflammation. It could or it could cause inflammation. It could or it could cause inflammation. It could actually exacerbate inflammation actually exacerbate inflammation actually exacerbate inflammation depending on whether or not it was of depending on whether or not it was of depending on whether or not it was of low or high intensity. Now, that makes low or high intensity. Now, that makes low or high intensity. Now, that makes it a very precarious technique and this it a very precarious technique and this it a very precarious technique and this may speak to some of the reason why some may speak to some of the reason why some may speak to some of the reason why some people report relief from acupuncture people report relief from acupuncture people report relief from acupuncture and others do not. and others do not. and others do not. However, they went a step further and However, they went a step further and However, they went a step further and stimulated other areas of the body using stimulated other areas of the body using stimulated other areas of the body using electroacupuncture. And what they found electroacupuncture. And what they found electroacupuncture. And what they found is that stimulation of the legs caused a is that stimulation of the legs caused a is that stimulation of the legs caused a circuit, a neural circuit to be circuit, a neural circuit to be circuit, a neural circuit to be activated that goes from the legs activated that goes from the legs activated that goes from the legs up to an area of the base of the brain up to an area of the base of the brain up to an area of the base of the brain called the DMV called the DMV called the DMV and activated the adrenal glands which and activated the adrenal glands which and activated the adrenal glands which sit atop your kidneys sit atop your kidneys sit atop your kidneys and caused the release of what are and caused the release of what are and caused the release of what are called catecholamines and those were called catecholamines and those were called catecholamines and those were strongly anti-inflammatory. strongly anti-inflammatory. strongly anti-inflammatory. In other words, electroacupuncture of In other words, electroacupuncture of In other words, electroacupuncture of the legs and feet can, if done the legs and feet can, if done the legs and feet can, if done correctly, be anti-inflammatory correctly, be anti-inflammatory correctly, be anti-inflammatory and reduce symptoms of pain and perhaps and reduce symptoms of pain and perhaps and reduce symptoms of pain and perhaps accelerate wound healing because accelerate wound healing because accelerate wound healing because activations of these catecholaminergic activations of these catecholaminergic activations of these catecholaminergic pathways can accelerate wound healing as pathways can accelerate wound healing as pathways can accelerate wound healing as well. Now, let's talk about a phenomenon well. Now, let's talk about a phenomenon well. Now, let's talk about a phenomenon that has long intrigued and perplexed that has long intrigued and perplexed that has long intrigued and perplexed people for probably thousands of years people for probably thousands of years people for probably thousands of years and that's and that's and that's redheads. You may have heard before that redheads. You may have heard before that redheads. You may have heard before that redheads have a higher pain threshold redheads have a higher pain threshold redheads have a higher pain threshold than other individuals and indeed that than other individuals and indeed that than other individuals and indeed that is true. is true. is true. There's now a study that looked at this There's now a study that looked at this There's now a study that looked at this mechanistically. There's a gene There's a gene There's a gene called the MC1R gene called the MC1R gene called the MC1R gene and this MC1R gene encodes for a number and this MC1R gene encodes for a number and this MC1R gene encodes for a number of different proteins. of different proteins. of different proteins. Some of those proteins, of course, are Some of those proteins, of course, are Some of those proteins, of course, are related to the production of melanin. related to the production of melanin. related to the production of melanin. This is why redheads often, not always, This is why redheads often, not always, This is why redheads often, not always, but often are very fair-skinned, but often are very fair-skinned, but often are very fair-skinned, sometimes have freckles, not always, and sometimes have freckles, not always, and sometimes have freckles, not always, and of course, have red hair. This gene, of course, have red hair. This gene, of course, have red hair. This gene, this MC1R gene, is associated with a this MC1R gene, is associated with a this MC1R gene, is associated with a pathway that relates to something that I've that relates to something that I've that relates to something that I've talked about on this podcast before talked about on this podcast before talked about on this podcast before during the episode on hunger and feeding during the episode on hunger and feeding during the episode on hunger and feeding and this is p o m c. P o m c stands for and this is p o m c. P o m c stands for and this is p o m c. P o m c stands for pro opiomelanocortin. pro opiomelanocortin. pro opiomelanocortin. And p o m c is cut up, it's cleaved into And p o m c is cut up, it's cleaved into And p o m c is cut up, it's cleaved into different hormones including one that different hormones including one that different hormones including one that enhances pain perception. This is enhances pain perception. This is enhances pain perception. This is melanocyte stimulating hormone. melanocyte stimulating hormone. melanocyte stimulating hormone. And another one that blocks pain, And another one that blocks pain, And another one that blocks pain, beta-endorphin. The endorphins are beta-endorphin. The endorphins are beta-endorphin. The endorphins are endogenously made meaning made within endogenously made meaning made within endogenously made meaning made within our body opioids. They actually make us our body opioids. They actually make us our body opioids. They actually make us feel numb in response to certain kinds of numb in response to certain kinds of numb in response to certain kinds of pain. Now, not completely numb, but they pain. Now, not completely numb, but they pain. Now, not completely numb, but they numb or reduce our perception of pain. numb or reduce our perception of pain. numb or reduce our perception of pain. We all have beta-endorphins, we all have We all have beta-endorphins, we all have We all have beta-endorphins, we all have p o m c, etc. But redheads make more of p o m c, etc. But redheads make more of p o m c, etc. But redheads make more of these endogenous endorphins. Now, this these endogenous endorphins. Now, this these endogenous endorphins. Now, this of course should not be taken to mean of course should not be taken to mean of course should not be taken to mean that redheads that redheads that redheads can tolerate more pain and therefore can tolerate more pain and therefore can tolerate more pain and therefore should be subjected to more pain. All it should be subjected to more pain. All it should be subjected to more pain. All it means is that their threshold for pain means is that their threshold for pain means is that their threshold for pain on average, not all of them, but on average, not all of them, but on average, not all of them, but on average is shifted higher than that of average is shifted higher than that of average is shifted higher than that of other individuals. And I should mention other individuals. And I should mention other individuals. And I should mention because I mentioned the ice bath that of because I mentioned the ice bath that of because I mentioned the ice bath that of course pain threshold is something that can be pain threshold is something that can be pain threshold is something that can be built up, but it does seem that certain built up, but it does seem that certain built up, but it does seem that certain patterns of thinking can allow us to patterns of thinking can allow us to patterns of thinking can allow us to buffer ourselves against the pain buffer ourselves against the pain buffer ourselves against the pain response. And that should not be surprising. And that should not be surprising. And that should not be surprising. Certain forms of thinking are associated Certain forms of thinking are associated Certain forms of thinking are associated with the release of particular with the release of particular with the release of particular neuromodulators, in particular dopamine. neuromodulators, in particular dopamine. neuromodulators, in particular dopamine. And dopamine And dopamine And dopamine it may seem is kind of the thing that it may seem is kind of the thing that it may seem is kind of the thing that underlies everything, but it's not. underlies everything, but it's not. underlies everything, but it's not. Dopamine is a molecule that's associated Dopamine is a molecule that's associated Dopamine is a molecule that's associated with novelty, expectation, motivation, with novelty, expectation, motivation, with novelty, expectation, motivation, and reward. We talked about this at the and reward. We talked about this at the and reward. We talked about this at the beginning of the episode. And the ways beginning of the episode. And the ways beginning of the episode. And the ways in which dopamine can modulate pain is in which dopamine can modulate pain is in which dopamine can modulate pain is not mysterious. It's really through the not mysterious. It's really through the not mysterious. It's really through the activation of brainstem neurons that activation of brainstem neurons that activation of brainstem neurons that communicate with areas of our body that communicate with areas of our body that communicate with areas of our body that deploy things like immune cells. So, for deploy things like immune cells. So, for deploy things like immune cells. So, for instance, we have neurons in our instance, we have neurons in our instance, we have neurons in our brainstem that can be modulated by the release of that can be modulated by the release of that can be modulated by the release of dopamine. And those neurons in the brain stem And those neurons in the brain stem And those neurons in the brain stem control the release of immune cells from control the release of immune cells from control the release of immune cells from tissues like the spleen or organs like tissues like the spleen or organs like tissues like the spleen or organs like the spleen. And those immune cells can the spleen. And those immune cells can the spleen. And those immune cells can then go combat infection. We've heard then go combat infection. We've heard then go combat infection. We've heard before that when we're happy, we're before that when we're happy, we're before that when we're happy, we're better able to combat infection, better able to combat infection, better able to combat infection, deal with pain, deal with all sorts of deal with pain, deal with all sorts of deal with pain, deal with all sorts of things. It essentially makes us more things. It essentially makes us more things. It essentially makes us more resilient because dopamine affects resilient because dopamine affects resilient because dopamine affects particular circuits and tells particular circuits and tells particular circuits and tells in a very neurobiological way, in a in a very neurobiological way, in a in a very neurobiological way, in a biochemical way, tells those cells and biochemical way, tells those cells and biochemical way, tells those cells and circuits that conditions are good. And circuits that conditions are good. And circuits that conditions are good. And it really does allow for more it really does allow for more it really does allow for more resilience. So, along those lines, let's resilience. So, along those lines, let's resilience. So, along those lines, let's talk about pleasure. talk about pleasure. talk about pleasure. With all the cells and tissues and With all the cells and tissues and With all the cells and tissues and machinery related to pain, you might machinery related to pain, you might machinery related to pain, you might think that our entire touch system is think that our entire touch system is think that our entire touch system is designed to allow us to detect pain and designed to allow us to detect pain and designed to allow us to detect pain and to avoid tissue damage. And while a good to avoid tissue damage. And while a good to avoid tissue damage. And while a good percentage of it is devoted to that, percentage of it is devoted to that, percentage of it is devoted to that, a good percentage of it is also devoted a good percentage of it is also devoted a good percentage of it is also devoted to this thing that we call pleasure. to this thing that we call pleasure. to this thing that we call pleasure. And that should come as no surprise. And that should come as no surprise. And that should come as no surprise. Pleasure serves an adaptive role. And Pleasure serves an adaptive role. And Pleasure serves an adaptive role. And that adaptive role relates to the fact that adaptive role relates to the fact that adaptive role relates to the fact that every species has a primary goal, that every species has a primary goal, that every species has a primary goal, which is to make more of itself. which is to make more of itself. which is to make more of itself. Otherwise, it would go extinct. Otherwise, it would go extinct. Otherwise, it would go extinct. That process of making more of itself, That process of making more of itself, That process of making more of itself, sexual reproduction, is closely sexual reproduction, is closely sexual reproduction, is closely associated with the sensation and the associated with the sensation and the associated with the sensation and the perception of pleasure. And it's no perception of pleasure. And it's no perception of pleasure. And it's no surprise that not only is the highest surprise that not only is the highest surprise that not only is the highest density of sensory receptors density of sensory receptors density of sensory receptors in and on and around the genitalia, but in and on and around the genitalia, but in and on and around the genitalia, but the process of reproduction evokes the process of reproduction evokes the process of reproduction evokes sensations and molecules and perceptions sensations and molecules and perceptions sensations and molecules and perceptions associated with pleasure. And the associated with pleasure. And the associated with pleasure. And the currency of pleasure exists in multiple currency of pleasure exists in multiple currency of pleasure exists in multiple chemical systems, but the primary ones chemical systems, but the primary ones chemical systems, but the primary ones are the dopamine system, which is the are the dopamine system, which is the are the dopamine system, which is the anticipation of pleasure, anticipation of pleasure, anticipation of pleasure, and the work required to achieve the and the work required to achieve the and the work required to achieve the ability to experience that pleasure, ability to experience that pleasure, ability to experience that pleasure, and the serotonin system, which is more and the serotonin system, which is more and the serotonin system, which is more closely related to the immediate closely related to the immediate closely related to the immediate experience of that pleasure. experience of that pleasure. experience of that pleasure. And from dopamine and serotonin stem out And from dopamine and serotonin stem out And from dopamine and serotonin stem out other hormones and molecules, things other hormones and molecules, things other hormones and molecules, things like oxytocin, which are associated with like oxytocin, which are associated with like oxytocin, which are associated with pair bonding. Oxytocin is more closely pair bonding. Oxytocin is more closely pair bonding. Oxytocin is more closely associated with the serotonin system associated with the serotonin system associated with the serotonin system biochemically and at the circuit level, biochemically and at the circuit level, biochemically and at the circuit level, meaning the areas of the brain and body meaning the areas of the brain and body meaning the areas of the brain and body that manufacture a lot of serotonin that manufacture a lot of serotonin that manufacture a lot of serotonin usually, not always, but usually contain usually, not always, but usually contain usually, not always, but usually contain neurons that also manufacture and make neurons that also manufacture and make neurons that also manufacture and make use of the molecule oxytocin. use of the molecule oxytocin. use of the molecule oxytocin. Those chemicals together create Those chemicals together create Those chemicals together create sensations of warmth, of sensations of warmth, of sensations of warmth, of uh well-being, of safety. The dopamine uh well-being, of safety. The dopamine uh well-being, of safety. The dopamine molecule is more closely associated with molecule is more closely associated with molecule is more closely associated with hormones like testosterone hormones like testosterone hormones like testosterone and other molecules involved with and other molecules involved with and other molecules involved with pursuit and further effort in order to pursuit and further effort in order to pursuit and further effort in order to get more of whatever could potentially get more of whatever could potentially get more of whatever could potentially cause more release of dopamine. So, if cause more release of dopamine. So, if cause more release of dopamine. So, if levels of serotonin and dopamine levels of serotonin and dopamine levels of serotonin and dopamine are too low, are too low, are too low, it becomes almost impossible to it becomes almost impossible to it becomes almost impossible to experience pleasure. experience pleasure. experience pleasure. There's a so-called anhedonia. There's a so-called anhedonia. There's a so-called anhedonia. This is also described as depression, This is also described as depression, This is also described as depression, although it needn't be long-term although it needn't be long-term although it needn't be long-term depression. So, certain drugs like antidepressants So, certain drugs like antidepressants So, certain drugs like antidepressants like Wellbutrin, bupropion, like Wellbutrin, bupropion, like Wellbutrin, bupropion, as it's commonly called, as it's commonly called, as it's commonly called, or the so-called SSRIs, the serotonin or the so-called SSRIs, the serotonin or the so-called SSRIs, the serotonin selective re- reuptake inhibitors, selective re- reuptake inhibitors, selective re- reuptake inhibitors, excuse me, like Prozac, Zoloft, and excuse me, like Prozac, Zoloft, and excuse me, like Prozac, Zoloft, and similar, will increase dopamine and similar, will increase dopamine and similar, will increase dopamine and serotonin, respectively. They're not serotonin, respectively. They're not serotonin, respectively. They're not increasing the peaks in those molecules, increasing the peaks in those molecules, increasing the peaks in those molecules, the what we call the acute release of the what we call the acute release of the what we call the acute release of those molecules. What they're doing is those molecules. What they're doing is those molecules. What they're doing is they're raising the overall levels of they're raising the overall levels of they're raising the overall levels of those molecules. They're raising the those molecules. They're raising the those molecules. They're raising the sort of foundation or the tide, if you sort of foundation or the tide, if you sort of foundation or the tide, if you will. Think about it as your mood or will. Think about it as your mood or will. Think about it as your mood or your pleasure, rather, is like a boat, your pleasure, rather, is like a boat, your pleasure, rather, is like a boat, and if it's on the shore, and it can't and if it's on the shore, and it can't and if it's on the shore, and it can't get out to sea unless that tide is high get out to sea unless that tide is high get out to sea unless that tide is high enough. That's kind of the way to think enough. That's kind of the way to think enough. That's kind of the way to think about these tonic levels of dopamine and about these tonic levels of dopamine and about these tonic levels of dopamine and serotonin. Now, most of us, fortunately, serotonin. Now, most of us, fortunately, serotonin. Now, most of us, fortunately, do not have problems with our baseline do not have problems with our baseline do not have problems with our baseline or our tonic levels of dopamine and or our tonic levels of dopamine and or our tonic levels of dopamine and serotonin release. The brain and body serotonin release. The brain and body serotonin release. The brain and body use these common currencies for use these common currencies for use these common currencies for different experiences. So, yes, if your different experiences. So, yes, if your different experiences. So, yes, if your dopamine and serotonin or I should dopamine and serotonin or I should dopamine and serotonin or I should say if your dopamine and or serotonin say if your dopamine and or serotonin say if your dopamine and or serotonin levels are too low, levels are too low, levels are too low, it will be very hard to achieve it will be very hard to achieve it will be very hard to achieve pleasure, to experience physical pleasure, to experience physical pleasure, to experience physical pleasure or emotional pleasure of any pleasure or emotional pleasure of any pleasure or emotional pleasure of any kind. That's why treatments of the sort that I That's why treatments of the sort that I That's why treatments of the sort that I described a minute ago described a minute ago described a minute ago might be right for you. Obviously, we might be right for you. Obviously, we might be right for you. Obviously, we can't determine if they're right for can't determine if they're right for can't determine if they're right for you. It's also why they have side you. It's also why they have side you. It's also why they have side effects. If you artificially increase effects. If you artificially increase effects. If you artificially increase these molecules that are associated with these molecules that are associated with these molecules that are associated with pleasure, often times you get a lack of pleasure, often times you get a lack of pleasure, often times you get a lack of motivation to go seek things like food. motivation to go seek things like food. motivation to go seek things like food. People don't get much interest in food People don't get much interest in food People don't get much interest in food cuz why should they if their serotonin cuz why should they if their serotonin cuz why should they if their serotonin levels are already up? Again, there's a levels are already up? Again, there's a levels are already up? Again, there's a ton of individual variation. I don't ton of individual variation. I don't ton of individual variation. I don't want to say that these antidepressants want to say that these antidepressants want to say that these antidepressants are always bad. Sometimes they've saved are always bad. Sometimes they've saved are always bad. Sometimes they've saved lives. They've saved millions of lives. They've saved millions of lives. They've saved millions of lives. Sometimes people have side effects that Sometimes people have side effects that Sometimes people have side effects that make them not the right choice. So, it make them not the right choice. So, it make them not the right choice. So, it has to be determined for the individual. has to be determined for the individual. has to be determined for the individual. Just briefly, cuz it's relevant to the Just briefly, cuz it's relevant to the Just briefly, cuz it's relevant to the conversation that we've been having, you conversation that we've been having, you conversation that we've been having, you might want to be wary of any experience, might want to be wary of any experience, might want to be wary of any experience, any experience, no matter how it any experience, no matter how it any experience, no matter how it arrives, chemical, physical, emotional, arrives, chemical, physical, emotional, arrives, chemical, physical, emotional, or some combination, or some combination, or some combination, you might want to be wary of letting you might want to be wary of letting you might want to be wary of letting your dopamine go too high, and certainly your dopamine go too high, and certainly your dopamine go too high, and certainly you want to be wary of it going too low you want to be wary of it going too low you want to be wary of it going too low because of the way that these circuits because of the way that these circuits because of the way that these circuits adjust. Basically, every time that the adjust. Basically, every time that the adjust. Basically, every time that the pleasure system is kicked in pleasure system is kicked in pleasure system is kicked in high gear, an absolutely spectacular in high gear, an absolutely spectacular in high gear, an absolutely spectacular event, you cannot be more ecstatic. event, you cannot be more ecstatic. event, you cannot be more ecstatic. There is a mirror symmetric activation There is a mirror symmetric activation There is a mirror symmetric activation of the pain system. of the pain system. of the pain system. And this might seem like an evil curse And this might seem like an evil curse And this might seem like an evil curse of biology, but it's not. This is of biology, but it's not. This is of biology, but it's not. This is actually a way to protect this whole actually a way to protect this whole actually a way to protect this whole system of reward and motivation that I system of reward and motivation that I system of reward and motivation that I talked about at the beginning of the talked about at the beginning of the talked about at the beginning of the episode. It might sound great to just ingest It might sound great to just ingest It might sound great to just ingest substances or engage in behaviors where substances or engage in behaviors where substances or engage in behaviors where it's just dopamine, it's just dopamine, it's just dopamine, and just constantly be motivated, and just constantly be motivated, and just constantly be motivated, but the system will eventually crash. but the system will eventually crash. but the system will eventually crash. And so, what happens is when you have a And so, what happens is when you have a And so, what happens is when you have a big increase in dopamine, you also will big increase in dopamine, you also will big increase in dopamine, you also will get a big increase in the circuits that get a big increase in the circuits that get a big increase in the circuits that underlie our sense of disappointment and underlie our sense of disappointment and underlie our sense of disappointment and readjusting the balance. And with readjusting the balance. And with readjusting the balance. And with repeated exposure to high levels of repeated exposure to high levels of repeated exposure to high levels of dopamine, not naturally occurring dopamine, not naturally occurring dopamine, not naturally occurring wonderful events, but really high wonderful events, but really high wonderful events, but really high chemically induced chemically induced chemically induced uh peaks in dopamine, uh peaks in dopamine, uh peaks in dopamine, high magnitude chemically induced peaks high magnitude chemically induced peaks high magnitude chemically induced peaks in dopamine, what happens is those peaks in dopamine, what happens is those peaks in dopamine, what happens is those peaks in dopamine start to go down and down in dopamine start to go down and down in dopamine start to go down and down and down in response to the same what and down in response to the same what and down in response to the same what ought to be incredible experience. We ought to be incredible experience. We ought to be incredible experience. We start to what's called habituate or start to what's called habituate or start to what's called habituate or attenuate. And yet, the pain attenuate. And yet, the pain attenuate. And yet, the pain increases in size. And this has a increases in size. And this has a increases in size. And this has a preservative function in keeping us preservative function in keeping us preservative function in keeping us safe, believe it or not. safe, believe it or not. safe, believe it or not. But what I just described is actually But what I just described is actually But what I just described is actually the basis of most, if not all, forms of the basis of most, if not all, forms of the basis of most, if not all, forms of addiction, something that we will deal addiction, something that we will deal addiction, something that we will deal with in a future episode in depth. So, with in a future episode in depth. So, with in a future episode in depth. So, today we talked about the pathways in today we talked about the pathways in today we talked about the pathways in the skin and in the brain and elsewhere the skin and in the brain and elsewhere the skin and in the brain and elsewhere in the body that control our sense of in the body that control our sense of in the body that control our sense of pleasure and pain. We described a number pleasure and pain. We described a number pleasure and pain. We described a number of different tools ranging from of different tools ranging from of different tools ranging from different supplements to uh different supplements to uh different supplements to uh electroacupuncture and various other tools that one could and various other tools that one could and various other tools that one could use to modulate your sense of pleasure use to modulate your sense of pleasure use to modulate your sense of pleasure or pain. And of course, in thinking or pain. And of course, in thinking or pain. And of course, in thinking about pleasure, we have to think about pleasure, we have to think about pleasure, we have to think about the dopamine system and the serotonin the dopamine system and the serotonin the dopamine system and the serotonin system and some of the related chemical system and some of the related chemical system and some of the related chemical systems. I realize that today's podcast systems. I realize that today's podcast systems. I realize that today's podcast had a lot of scientific details. I don't had a lot of scientific details. I don't had a lot of scientific details. I don't expect that everyone would be able to expect that everyone would be able to expect that everyone would be able to understand all these details all at understand all these details all at understand all these details all at once. What's more important, really, What's more important, really, What's more important, really, is to understand the general principles is to understand the general principles is to understand the general principles of how something like pleasure and pain of how something like pleasure and pain of how something like pleasure and pain work, how they interact, and the various work, how they interact, and the various work, how they interact, and the various cells and systems within the brain and cells and systems within the brain and cells and systems within the brain and body that allow them to occur, and that body that allow them to occur, and that body that allow them to occur, and that modulate or change their ability to modulate or change their ability to modulate or change their ability to occur, and of course, your subjective occur, and of course, your subjective occur, and of course, your subjective experience of pleasure or pain. So, I do experience of pleasure or pain. So, I do experience of pleasure or pain. So, I do hope that this was hope that this was hope that this was on whole more pleasurable than painful on whole more pleasurable than painful on whole more pleasurable than painful for you. And last but not least, I thank for you. And last but not least, I thank for you. And last but not least, I thank you for your time and attention, and you for your time and attention, and you for your time and attention, and thank you for your interest in science.