What goes on in our brains when we think What goes on in our brains when we think What goes on in our brains when we think might be that we're running simulations might be that we're running simulations might be that we're running simulations related to the thought using that related to the thought using that related to the thought using that sensory motor infrastructure of sensory motor infrastructure of sensory motor infrastructure of the brain. the brain. the brain. &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is that like maybe when you think about a that like maybe when you think about a that like maybe when you think about a cat for example or you think the concept cat for example or you think the concept cat for example or you think the concept of a cat that the mental instantiation of a cat that the mental instantiation of a cat that the mental instantiation of that or the brain mechanism of that or the brain mechanism of that or the brain mechanism instantiation of having that thought is instantiation of having that thought is instantiation of having that thought is to run a little simulation and visual to run a little simulation and visual to run a little simulation and visual cortex that kind of includes what a cat cortex that kind of includes what a cat cortex that kind of includes what a cat looks like a simulation in auditory looks like a simulation in auditory looks like a simulation in auditory cortex that what does a cat sound like cortex that what does a cat sound like cortex that what does a cat sound like and as I'm telling you this I'm you know and as I'm telling you this I'm you know and as I'm telling you this I'm you know if you use the word cat um what color if you use the word cat um what color if you use the word cat um what color cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty litter cuz my sister had cats and it litter cuz my sister had cats and it litter cuz my sister had cats and it drove me. The smell of kitty litter is drove me. The smell of kitty litter is drove me. The smell of kitty litter is just so aversive to me. just so aversive to me. just so aversive to me. &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation in telling me the color and adding an in telling me the color and adding an in telling me the color and adding an additional sensory quality. It provides additional sensory quality. It provides additional sensory quality. It provides an explanation for why you might, you an explanation for why you might, you an explanation for why you might, you know, be know, be know, be driving on the freeway and having to driving on the freeway and having to driving on the freeway and having to merge into difficult traffic and telling merge into difficult traffic and telling merge into difficult traffic and telling your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. I've got to I got to pay attention now." I've got to I got to pay attention now." I've got to I got to pay attention now." Like why would speech impair you from Like why would speech impair you from Like why would speech impair you from visual motor visual motor visual motor &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of cognitive system that's in cognitive system that's in cognitive system that's in operation? And maybe you need to shift operation? And maybe you need to shift operation? And maybe you need to shift some resources away from processing the some resources away from processing the some resources away from processing the conversation and toward some, you know, conversation and toward some, you know, conversation and toward some, you know, actually dealing with the here and now actually dealing with the here and now actually dealing with the here and now sensory motor task. sensory motor task. sensory motor task. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based [music] tools for everyday science-based [music] tools for everyday science-based [music] tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Jennifer Gro. Dr. Jennifer today is Dr. Jennifer Gro. Dr. Jennifer today is Dr. Jennifer Gro. Dr. Jennifer Gro is a professor of psychology and Gro is a professor of psychology and Gro is a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Duke University. Her neuroscience at Duke University. Her neuroscience at Duke University. Her laboratory studies how our brain laboratory studies how our brain laboratory studies how our brain represents the world around us. In represents the world around us. In represents the world around us. In particular, how our different senses are particular, how our different senses are particular, how our different senses are merged in the brain so that we can focus merged in the brain so that we can focus merged in the brain so that we can focus and learn more effectively, including and learn more effectively, including and learn more effectively, including how our eye movements fundamentally how our eye movements fundamentally how our eye movements fundamentally shape not just what we pay attention to, shape not just what we pay attention to, shape not just what we pay attention to, but how they dynamically control what but how they dynamically control what but how they dynamically control what our brain is capable of. What she shares our brain is capable of. What she shares our brain is capable of. What she shares is fundamental to understanding how your is fundamental to understanding how your is fundamental to understanding how your brain works and also how best to focus brain works and also how best to focus brain works and also how best to focus on and learn different types of on and learn different types of on and learn different types of information. Not just information that information. Not just information that information. Not just information that you might read on a page, although you might read on a page, although you might read on a page, although including that, but also what you hear, including that, but also what you hear, including that, but also what you hear, what you remember, and the very thoughts what you remember, and the very thoughts what you remember, and the very thoughts you have about your life experiences. We you have about your life experiences. We you have about your life experiences. We also discuss thinking itself. In fact, also discuss thinking itself. In fact, also discuss thinking itself. In fact, we discuss what thoughts really are. And we discuss what thoughts really are. And we discuss what thoughts really are. And there, Dr. Gro shares with us what is there, Dr. Gro shares with us what is there, Dr. Gro shares with us what is perhaps the clearest and most useful perhaps the clearest and most useful perhaps the clearest and most useful definition of what thoughts are and how definition of what thoughts are and how definition of what thoughts are and how you can control them. As someone who has you can control them. As someone who has you can control them. As someone who has been in the field of neuroscience for been in the field of neuroscience for been in the field of neuroscience for nearly three decades, I must say that nearly three decades, I must say that nearly three decades, I must say that her explanation of what thinking is at her explanation of what thinking is at her explanation of what thinking is at the neural level, at the psychological the neural level, at the psychological the neural level, at the psychological level, and at the experiential level is level, and at the experiential level is level, and at the experiential level is the most compelling and useful one I've the most compelling and useful one I've the most compelling and useful one I've ever come across. Today, Dr. Gro ever come across. Today, Dr. Gro ever come across. Today, Dr. Gro explains how to use your experiences, explains how to use your experiences, explains how to use your experiences, the information you encounter, and the information you encounter, and the information you encounter, and knowledge of how thoughts are built up knowledge of how thoughts are built up knowledge of how thoughts are built up in the brain to become a better thinker in the brain to become a better thinker in the brain to become a better thinker and indeed smarter. I'm certain that the and indeed smarter. I'm certain that the and indeed smarter. I'm certain that the information you'll learn from Dr. Grow information you'll learn from Dr. Grow information you'll learn from Dr. Grow today is not like any other discussion today is not like any other discussion today is not like any other discussion you've heard about the brain or you've heard about the brain or you've heard about the brain or psychology. I'm also certain that it psychology. I'm also certain that it psychology. I'm also certain that it will be extremely useful for anyone will be extremely useful for anyone will be extremely useful for anyone wishing to better understand how the wishing to better understand how the wishing to better understand how the brain works, how their thoughts and brain works, how their thoughts and brain works, how their thoughts and emotions arise, and anyone who wants to emotions arise, and anyone who wants to emotions arise, and anyone who wants to get better at learning, thinking more get better at learning, thinking more get better at learning, thinking more deeply, or simply experiencing life with deeply, or simply experiencing life with deeply, or simply experiencing life with more richness. Before we begin, I'd like more richness. Before we begin, I'd like more richness. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Jennifer Grow. Dr. Jennifer Grow, Dr. Jennifer Grow. Dr. Jennifer Grow, Dr. Jennifer Grow. Dr. Jennifer Grow, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's great to be here. &gt;&gt; We've never had a proper conversation on &gt;&gt; We've never had a proper conversation on &gt;&gt; We've never had a proper conversation on this podcast about sensory integration. this podcast about sensory integration. this podcast about sensory integration. We've talked about vision, talked a We've talked about vision, talked a We've talked about vision, talked a little bit about hearing, a little bit little bit about hearing, a little bit little bit about hearing, a little bit about touch, smell, taste, but we've about touch, smell, taste, but we've about touch, smell, taste, but we've never talked about how the senses come never talked about how the senses come never talked about how the senses come together. And that's critical to together. And that's critical to together. And that's critical to everyday life, critical to perception. everyday life, critical to perception. everyday life, critical to perception. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I know you focused perhaps &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I know you focused perhaps &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I know you focused perhaps mainly on the auditory system, but you mainly on the auditory system, but you mainly on the auditory system, but you really are a auditory visual integration really are a auditory visual integration really are a auditory visual integration person. I know this because I've person. I know this because I've person. I know this because I've followed your work for a number of followed your work for a number of followed your work for a number of years. So where in the brain do our eyes years. So where in the brain do our eyes years. So where in the brain do our eyes and our ears first come together to and our ears first come together to and our ears first come together to impact our perception of life? Like we impact our perception of life? Like we impact our perception of life? Like we you know the tea kettle is whistling or you know the tea kettle is whistling or you know the tea kettle is whistling or you know we hear a knock on the door. We you know we hear a knock on the door. We you know we hear a knock on the door. We know where the door is. We know where know where the door is. We know where know where the door is. We know where the tea kettle ought to be. But where do the tea kettle ought to be. But where do the tea kettle ought to be. But where do these things first collide? these things first collide? these things first collide? &gt;&gt; The story that is triggered by that &gt;&gt; The story that is triggered by that &gt;&gt; The story that is triggered by that question is a little bit long. So, uh question is a little bit long. So, uh question is a little bit long. So, uh maybe I can start at the beginning of maybe I can start at the beginning of maybe I can start at the beginning of when I first got interested in this when I first got interested in this when I first got interested in this question. And so, I was a college question. And so, I was a college question. And so, I was a college student. I was interested in student. I was interested in student. I was interested in neuroscience, but we didn't have a neuroscience, but we didn't have a neuroscience, but we didn't have a neuroscience um major. So, um, a neuroscience um major. So, um, a neuroscience um major. So, um, a couple of us talked, uh, a professor couple of us talked, uh, a professor couple of us talked, uh, a professor into offering a seminar in into offering a seminar in into offering a seminar in neuroethology and kind of like what neuroethology and kind of like what neuroethology and kind of like what he thought were sort of the coolest he thought were sort of the coolest he thought were sort of the coolest findings in neuroscience. Uh, and in findings in neuroscience. Uh, and in findings in neuroscience. Uh, and in that class, I learned about a uh, study that class, I learned about a uh, study that class, I learned about a uh, study showing that, and I'm going to I'm going showing that, and I'm going to I'm going showing that, and I'm going to I'm going to begin with the neuroscience nerdy to begin with the neuroscience nerdy to begin with the neuroscience nerdy lingo, and then we'll unpack it. lingo, and then we'll unpack it. lingo, and then we'll unpack it. um that uh there's a brain structure um that uh there's a brain structure um that uh there's a brain structure called the superior caliculus um that's called the superior caliculus um that's called the superior caliculus um that's responsive to both visual and auditory responsive to both visual and auditory responsive to both visual and auditory stimuli and that the responses to stimuli and that the responses to stimuli and that the responses to auditory stimula depended on where the auditory stimula depended on where the auditory stimula depended on where the eyes were looking. eyes were looking. eyes were looking. Um if you move the eyes the neurons Um if you move the eyes the neurons Um if you move the eyes the neurons receptive field, the region in space receptive field, the region in space receptive field, the region in space where they were responsive to would where they were responsive to would where they were responsive to would shift um as the eyes moved. And that shift um as the eyes moved. And that shift um as the eyes moved. And that blew my mind. I could not get that out blew my mind. I could not get that out blew my mind. I could not get that out of my head. Um, and it kind of set me on of my head. Um, and it kind of set me on of my head. Um, and it kind of set me on the track that I've been on ever the track that I've been on ever the track that I've been on ever since then. since then. since then. &gt;&gt; One of the things that was really &gt;&gt; One of the things that was really &gt;&gt; One of the things that was really interesting to me about it is that interesting to me about it is that interesting to me about it is that figuring out where a sound is with figuring out where a sound is with figuring out where a sound is with respect to where the eyes are looking is respect to where the eyes are looking is respect to where the eyes are looking is something that would be easy for us to something that would be easy for us to something that would be easy for us to do with a pencil and paper. You know, do with a pencil and paper. You know, do with a pencil and paper. You know, it's very simple math. If you know that it's very simple math. If you know that it's very simple math. If you know that um the sound is located say uh you know um the sound is located say uh you know um the sound is located say uh you know 10 degrees to the right and your eyes 10 degrees to the right and your eyes 10 degrees to the right and your eyes are looking 10 degrees to the left and are looking 10 degrees to the left and are looking 10 degrees to the left and that tells you that the sound is 20° to that tells you that the sound is 20° to that tells you that the sound is 20° to the right of where your eyes are. Really the right of where your eyes are. Really the right of where your eyes are. Really not that hard to do. But from what I not that hard to do. But from what I not that hard to do. But from what I knew at that point um about how the knew at that point um about how the knew at that point um about how the brain represents this kind of spatial brain represents this kind of spatial brain represents this kind of spatial information, it seemed a big puzzle for information, it seemed a big puzzle for information, it seemed a big puzzle for how the brain might actually create how the brain might actually create how the brain might actually create these kind of moving representations of these kind of moving representations of these kind of moving representations of where the sound is located. where the sound is located. where the sound is located. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what you're talking about &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what you're talking about &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because what you're talking about are dynamic maps. Like we have a I think are dynamic maps. Like we have a I think are dynamic maps. Like we have a I think most people probably appreciate that we most people probably appreciate that we most people probably appreciate that we have a map of our body surface, the have a map of our body surface, the have a map of our body surface, the so-called homunculus. Y so-called homunculus. Y so-called homunculus. Y &gt;&gt; and so if one were to stimulate in a &gt;&gt; and so if one were to stimulate in a &gt;&gt; and so if one were to stimulate in a given region of the brain, you'd uh have given region of the brain, you'd uh have given region of the brain, you'd uh have the illusion of uh being touched at that the illusion of uh being touched at that the illusion of uh being touched at that location on the body. People perhaps location on the body. People perhaps location on the body. People perhaps have seen that um the more sensitive an have seen that um the more sensitive an have seen that um the more sensitive an area of the body like the fingertips or area of the body like the fingertips or area of the body like the fingertips or lips or face uh or feet, the larger the lips or face uh or feet, the larger the lips or face uh or feet, the larger the representation in the brain. But what representation in the brain. But what representation in the brain. But what you're talking about is shifting maps you're talking about is shifting maps you're talking about is shifting maps depending on where the eyes move. And depending on where the eyes move. And depending on where the eyes move. And the eyes move quite a lot. the eyes move quite a lot. the eyes move quite a lot. &gt;&gt; They move quite a lot. Exactly. and &gt;&gt; They move quite a lot. Exactly. and &gt;&gt; They move quite a lot. Exactly. and uh mostly we're not aware of this, uh mostly we're not aware of this, uh mostly we're not aware of this, &gt;&gt; right? But if you think about it, every &gt;&gt; right? But if you think about it, every &gt;&gt; right? But if you think about it, every time your eyes move, the visual scene is time your eyes move, the visual scene is time your eyes move, the visual scene is shifting massively on the retina, shifting massively on the retina, shifting massively on the retina, &gt;&gt; but we don't even notice this. &gt;&gt; but we don't even notice this. &gt;&gt; but we don't even notice this. &gt;&gt; Um, and this is an indication that the &gt;&gt; Um, and this is an indication that the &gt;&gt; Um, and this is an indication that the brain is doing a ton of computation brain is doing a ton of computation brain is doing a ton of computation under the hood to give us that under the hood to give us that under the hood to give us that perceptual experience because if we were perceptual experience because if we were perceptual experience because if we were just representing reality, the reality just representing reality, the reality just representing reality, the reality would be these massively shifting, would be these massively shifting, would be these massively shifting, smeared visual scenes. smeared visual scenes. smeared visual scenes. One thing that so intriguing to me about One thing that so intriguing to me about One thing that so intriguing to me about the auditory system is and the visual the auditory system is and the visual the auditory system is and the visual system is the extent to which they can system is the extent to which they can system is the extent to which they can contract and dilate so fast. contract and dilate so fast. contract and dilate so fast. &gt;&gt; So for instance, if I'm uh like walking &gt;&gt; So for instance, if I'm uh like walking &gt;&gt; So for instance, if I'm uh like walking to get on public transportation of some to get on public transportation of some to get on public transportation of some sort, like a light rail or a subway, um sort, like a light rail or a subway, um sort, like a light rail or a subway, um I'm walking, you know, there's sound I'm walking, you know, there's sound I'm walking, you know, there's sound going by me, may or may not be relevant, going by me, may or may not be relevant, going by me, may or may not be relevant, but at some point I sit down. Chances but at some point I sit down. Chances but at some point I sit down. Chances are I open up a book or a computer. are I open up a book or a computer. are I open up a book or a computer. These days, people go into their phone These days, people go into their phone These days, people go into their phone and we say into the phone because and we say into the phone because and we say into the phone because there's a lot of sensory information there's a lot of sensory information there's a lot of sensory information there, but that our visual world and our there, but that our visual world and our there, but that our visual world and our auditory world just goes into, you know, auditory world just goes into, you know, auditory world just goes into, you know, uh, a small box and we expect whatever uh, a small box and we expect whatever uh, a small box and we expect whatever we're looking at to relate to the sounds we're looking at to relate to the sounds we're looking at to relate to the sounds that we're hearing in that small box, that we're hearing in that small box, that we're hearing in that small box, right? &gt;&gt; But if somebody says, "Excuse me, do you &gt;&gt; But if somebody says, "Excuse me, do you &gt;&gt; But if somebody says, "Excuse me, do you have a ticket?" You, you know, to look have a ticket?" You, you know, to look have a ticket?" You, you know, to look up, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; We take this for granted. Like most &gt;&gt; We take this for granted. Like most &gt;&gt; We take this for granted. Like most people might think of course you look up people might think of course you look up people might think of course you look up like the sound is coming from over there like the sound is coming from over there like the sound is coming from over there it's now a person but we all of a sudden it's now a person but we all of a sudden it's now a person but we all of a sudden we can remap our visual auditory world we can remap our visual auditory world we can remap our visual auditory world and all the context in like milliseconds and all the context in like milliseconds and all the context in like milliseconds &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; so is that all happening um and we've &gt;&gt; so is that all happening um and we've &gt;&gt; so is that all happening um and we've been talking about superior caliculus been talking about superior caliculus been talking about superior caliculus the in this structure the superior the in this structure the superior the in this structure the superior caliculus below our neoortex meaning is caliculus below our neoortex meaning is caliculus below our neoortex meaning is it below our kind of conscious awareness it below our kind of conscious awareness it below our kind of conscious awareness &gt;&gt; you know gosh I wish we knew where &gt;&gt; you know gosh I wish we knew where &gt;&gt; you know gosh I wish we knew where conscious awareness was I think That's conscious awareness was I think That's conscious awareness was I think That's an open question. Um, and it, you know, an open question. Um, and it, you know, an open question. Um, and it, you know, the superior caliculus is important in the superior caliculus is important in the superior caliculus is important in this story because that's where the this story because that's where the this story because that's where the research began. It's not that that's research began. It's not that that's research began. It's not that that's where the binding of visual and auditory where the binding of visual and auditory where the binding of visual and auditory space, you know, is necessarily fully space, you know, is necessarily fully space, you know, is necessarily fully contained there and only there. I think contained there and only there. I think contained there and only there. I think it's a much bigger problem. And I think it's a much bigger problem. And I think it's a much bigger problem. And I think what you're describing is kind of um you what you're describing is kind of um you what you're describing is kind of um you know another version of this kind of um know another version of this kind of um know another version of this kind of um capturing of um or integrating or capturing of um or integrating or capturing of um or integrating or connecting the information from one connecting the information from one connecting the information from one sensory system to another. That kind of sensory system to another. That kind of sensory system to another. That kind of shifting your resources around is shifting your resources around is shifting your resources around is something that happens in a few something that happens in a few something that happens in a few different contexts like what you're different contexts like what you're different contexts like what you're describing. And I think one of the describing. And I think one of the describing. And I think one of the things that's really interesting about things that's really interesting about things that's really interesting about the phone or really any screen where the phone or really any screen where the phone or really any screen where you're watching a video is that the you're watching a video is that the you're watching a video is that the sound was never coming directly from the sound was never coming directly from the sound was never coming directly from the screen where you're looking at the screen where you're looking at the screen where you're looking at the visual image. visual image. visual image. &gt;&gt; You know, it's coming from somewhere &gt;&gt; You know, it's coming from somewhere &gt;&gt; You know, it's coming from somewhere else. Maybe you've got earbuds in and else. Maybe you've got earbuds in and else. Maybe you've got earbuds in and it's coming from the earbuds. Maybe the it's coming from the earbuds. Maybe the it's coming from the earbuds. Maybe the earbud signal is simulating what the earbud signal is simulating what the earbud signal is simulating what the location should be um if it was really location should be um if it was really location should be um if it was really coming from the screen, but it's a coming from the screen, but it's a coming from the screen, but it's a simulation. It's not actually simulation. It's not actually simulation. It's not actually reality. &gt;&gt; That's so interesting. So yeah, let's &gt;&gt; That's so interesting. So yeah, let's &gt;&gt; That's so interesting. So yeah, let's unpack this a bit. So we merge what we unpack this a bit. So we merge what we unpack this a bit. So we merge what we see with what we hear. Y see with what we hear. Y see with what we hear. Y &gt;&gt; if it makes sense to merge them like &gt;&gt; if it makes sense to merge them like &gt;&gt; if it makes sense to merge them like lips are moving. lips are moving. lips are moving. &gt;&gt; Lips are moving &gt;&gt; Lips are moving &gt;&gt; Lips are moving &gt;&gt; and that's in our hand about a foot in &gt;&gt; and that's in our hand about a foot in &gt;&gt; and that's in our hand about a foot in front of us front of us front of us &gt;&gt; but the sounds are coming in elsewhere, &gt;&gt; but the sounds are coming in elsewhere, &gt;&gt; but the sounds are coming in elsewhere, &gt;&gt; right? This is very different um than &gt;&gt; right? This is very different um than &gt;&gt; right? This is very different um than say like if somebody's mouth were moving say like if somebody's mouth were moving say like if somebody's mouth were moving and the sounds coming out of it were and the sounds coming out of it were and the sounds coming out of it were offset by even the tiniest bit of time. offset by even the tiniest bit of time. offset by even the tiniest bit of time. It looks weird. It looks weird. It looks weird. &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird. &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird. &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird. &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird like this &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird like this &gt;&gt; It looks totally weird like this video. Yeah. Somebody somebody grabbed video. Yeah. Somebody somebody grabbed video. Yeah. Somebody somebody grabbed this like ripped this video from this like ripped this video from this like ripped this video from the internet and there's a time delay, the internet and there's a time delay, the internet and there's a time delay, right? &gt;&gt; But we easily merge what we see with &gt;&gt; But we easily merge what we see with &gt;&gt; But we easily merge what we see with sounds. That's right. Maybe talk about sounds. That's right. Maybe talk about sounds. That's right. Maybe talk about this because I now I'm realizing like this because I now I'm realizing like this because I now I'm realizing like if I sit and watch if I sit and watch if I sit and watch &gt;&gt; a movie &gt;&gt; a movie &gt;&gt; a movie &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; or movie theater or on a big screen or &gt;&gt; or movie theater or on a big screen or &gt;&gt; or movie theater or on a big screen or my computer, my computer, my computer, &gt;&gt; the sound is not coming from the screen. &gt;&gt; the sound is not coming from the screen. &gt;&gt; the sound is not coming from the screen. It's coming from a speaker which is like It's coming from a speaker which is like It's coming from a speaker which is like projecting vertically. projecting vertically. projecting vertically. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; How does that work? &gt;&gt; How does that work? &gt;&gt; How does that work? &gt;&gt; Well, not only that, but like the sound &gt;&gt; Well, not only that, but like the sound &gt;&gt; Well, not only that, but like the sound is jumping around in your perception as is jumping around in your perception as is jumping around in your perception as different people on the screen from different people on the screen from different people on the screen from different locations on the screen are different locations on the screen are different locations on the screen are speaking, are speaking, are speaking, &gt;&gt; right? and they're both coming in &gt;&gt; right? and they're both coming in &gt;&gt; right? and they're both coming in through your ears or through the speak through your ears or through the speak through your ears or through the speak well &gt;&gt; whatever means the sound is being &gt;&gt; whatever means the sound is being &gt;&gt; whatever means the sound is being delivered to you is not changing as the delivered to you is not changing as the delivered to you is not changing as the different people are speaking different people are speaking different people are speaking &gt;&gt; right so let's say a dialogue on a &gt;&gt; right so let's say a dialogue on a &gt;&gt; right so let's say a dialogue on a screen between two characters and then screen between two characters and then screen between two characters and then maybe there's an explosion in the maybe there's an explosion in the maybe there's an explosion in the background or another character walks in background or another character walks in background or another character walks in the room the room the room &gt;&gt; that the source of the sound for us &gt;&gt; that the source of the sound for us &gt;&gt; that the source of the sound for us whether it's computer or speakers in the whether it's computer or speakers in the whether it's computer or speakers in the room or movie theater or earbuds room or movie theater or earbuds room or movie theater or earbuds &gt;&gt; is always constant but we can quickly &gt;&gt; is always constant but we can quickly &gt;&gt; is always constant but we can quickly move the sound with our eyes or our eyes move the sound with our eyes or our eyes move the sound with our eyes or our eyes moving the sound with our moving the sound with our moving the sound with our &gt;&gt; ears. Let me let me amend a little bit &gt;&gt; ears. Let me let me amend a little bit &gt;&gt; ears. Let me let me amend a little bit here because um you know it depends a here because um you know it depends a here because um you know it depends a lot on like how the sound is mixed. They lot on like how the sound is mixed. They lot on like how the sound is mixed. They can put in some spatial cues but if they can put in some spatial cues but if they can put in some spatial cues but if they haven't done that then it then what we haven't done that then it then what we haven't done that then it then what we just said applies. And I think one of just said applies. And I think one of just said applies. And I think one of some of my favorite videos for, you some of my favorite videos for, you some of my favorite videos for, you know, for really appreciating this is a know, for really appreciating this is a know, for really appreciating this is a are videos of actual ventriloquists are videos of actual ventriloquists are videos of actual ventriloquists working with their puppets because there working with their puppets because there working with their puppets because there they are, you know, the puppeteer is they are, you know, the puppeteer is they are, you know, the puppeteer is speaking and they're making it seem like speaking and they're making it seem like speaking and they're making it seem like the puppet is speaking and they're the puppet is speaking and they're the puppet is speaking and they're making our perception switch back and making our perception switch back and making our perception switch back and forth from their own face to the puppet forth from their own face to the puppet forth from their own face to the puppet face, back and forth depending on what face, back and forth depending on what face, back and forth depending on what they're actually saying. So this is what they're actually saying. So this is what they're actually saying. So this is a ventriloquist that says like hey a ventriloquist that says like hey a ventriloquist that says like hey Cornelius how are you and then Cornelius how are you and then Cornelius how are you and then Cornelius says but the same person says I'm doing says but the same person says I'm doing says but the same person says I'm doing great you know and they probably they great you know and they probably they great you know and they probably they probably move their lips a little less probably move their lips a little less probably move their lips a little less when they do that. when they do that. when they do that. &gt;&gt; Yeah they try to speak like this &gt;&gt; Yeah they try to speak like this &gt;&gt; Yeah they try to speak like this without moving their lips too much. Um without moving their lips too much. Um without moving their lips too much. Um and they sometimes will do a trick of and they sometimes will do a trick of and they sometimes will do a trick of like there are certain sounds that you like there are certain sounds that you like there are certain sounds that you just cannot make without closing your just cannot make without closing your just cannot make without closing your lips uh in front and that's really lips uh in front and that's really lips uh in front and that's really &gt;&gt; hard to fool people about. So, for &gt;&gt; hard to fool people about. So, for &gt;&gt; hard to fool people about. So, for example, if it's a word that begins with example, if it's a word that begins with example, if it's a word that begins with a B or has a B in it, they might subtly a B or has a B in it, they might subtly a B or has a B in it, they might subtly just cover their mouth a little bit just cover their mouth a little bit just cover their mouth a little bit while they're making that B sound so while they're making that B sound so while they're making that B sound so that it's a kind of misdirection like a that it's a kind of misdirection like a that it's a kind of misdirection like a magician would do to sort of keep you magician would do to sort of keep you magician would do to sort of keep you from attending too much to the from attending too much to the from attending too much to the ventriloquist and throw your attention over to the and throw your attention over to the and throw your attention over to the puppet. So, our perception can switch puppet. So, our perception can switch puppet. So, our perception can switch back and forth between where um our back and forth between where um our back and forth between where um our brains are telling us this is the most brains are telling us this is the most brains are telling us this is the most likely candidate for the source of this likely candidate for the source of this likely candidate for the source of this sound. So, I'm going to override what my sound. So, I'm going to override what my sound. So, I'm going to override what my ears are telling me to perceive the ears are telling me to perceive the ears are telling me to perceive the sound is coming from here versus here. sound is coming from here versus here. sound is coming from here versus here. &gt;&gt; Is this something we learn during &gt;&gt; Is this something we learn during &gt;&gt; Is this something we learn during development? Like, do kids come into the development? Like, do kids come into the development? Like, do kids come into the world understanding how to merge sight world understanding how to merge sight world understanding how to merge sight and sound or and sound or and sound or &gt;&gt; um or is that a learned phenomenon? It &gt;&gt; um or is that a learned phenomenon? It &gt;&gt; um or is that a learned phenomenon? It has to be learned and it has to be has to be learned and it has to be has to be learned and it has to be continuously updated during the course continuously updated during the course continuously updated during the course of development until you reach your of development until you reach your of development until you reach your adult body size. So, let me back up a adult body size. So, let me back up a adult body size. So, let me back up a little bit and talk about how do we little bit and talk about how do we little bit and talk about how do we localize sound, especially when we're localize sound, especially when we're localize sound, especially when we're not talking about, you know, screens and not talking about, you know, screens and not talking about, you know, screens and video and movies and what whatnot, but video and movies and what whatnot, but video and movies and what whatnot, but just like out there in the in the real just like out there in the in the real just like out there in the in the real world. The way we tell where a sound is coming The way we tell where a sound is coming The way we tell where a sound is coming from is by the physics of the world from is by the physics of the world from is by the physics of the world causing differential delays for the causing differential delays for the causing differential delays for the sound to arrive at one ear versus the sound to arrive at one ear versus the sound to arrive at one ear versus the other. So sound takes a certain amount other. So sound takes a certain amount other. So sound takes a certain amount of time. You know, a sound coming from of time. You know, a sound coming from of time. You know, a sound coming from over here will get to this ear before it over here will get to this ear before it over here will get to this ear before it gets to this ear. And it'll be slightly gets to this ear. And it'll be slightly gets to this ear. And it'll be slightly louder in this ear than in this one louder in this ear than in this one louder in this ear than in this one &gt;&gt; because it's just closer to that ear. &gt;&gt; because it's just closer to that ear. &gt;&gt; because it's just closer to that ear. &gt;&gt; It's closer, but also there's a kind &gt;&gt; It's closer, but also there's a kind &gt;&gt; It's closer, but also there's a kind of acoustic shadow cast by the head. So of acoustic shadow cast by the head. So of acoustic shadow cast by the head. So the soundwave has to kind of come and the soundwave has to kind of come and the soundwave has to kind of come and then go around and there's a little, you then go around and there's a little, you then go around and there's a little, you know, there's a little sort of dip in know, there's a little sort of dip in know, there's a little sort of dip in the sound intensity cast by the shadow the sound intensity cast by the shadow the sound intensity cast by the shadow of the head. I like to think about the of the head. I like to think about the of the head. I like to think about the timing cues because they're really easy timing cues because they're really easy timing cues because they're really easy to calculate. So if you know how far to calculate. So if you know how far to calculate. So if you know how far apart your ears are and you know what apart your ears are and you know what apart your ears are and you know what the speed of sound is, then you can the speed of sound is, then you can the speed of sound is, then you can figure out what's the delay for the figure out what's the delay for the figure out what's the delay for the sound for sound to get um to reach this sound for sound to get um to reach this sound for sound to get um to reach this ear after this ear. ear after this ear. ear after this ear. I often take off my glasses to measure I often take off my glasses to measure I often take off my glasses to measure the distance between my two ears that the distance between my two ears that the distance between my two ears that way. And it's something like about a way. And it's something like about a way. And it's something like about a half a millisecond is the largest delay half a millisecond is the largest delay half a millisecond is the largest delay you can experience. you can experience. you can experience. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; Half a millisecond. &gt;&gt; So this is tiny. And that is for the &gt;&gt; So this is tiny. And that is for the &gt;&gt; So this is tiny. And that is for the difference between a sound here versus a difference between a sound here versus a difference between a sound here versus a sound here. sound here. sound here. &gt;&gt; So something from your right versus from &gt;&gt; So something from your right versus from &gt;&gt; So something from your right versus from your left. your left. your left. &gt;&gt; Exactly. we can obviously detect much &gt;&gt; Exactly. we can obviously detect much &gt;&gt; Exactly. we can obviously detect much smaller sound separations than just smaller sound separations than just smaller sound separations than just totally left versus totally right. So totally left versus totally right. So totally left versus totally right. So there's, you know, it's an incredible there's, you know, it's an incredible there's, you know, it's an incredible feat of computational power by the feat of computational power by the feat of computational power by the brain. I think maybe we should tell the brain. I think maybe we should tell the brain. I think maybe we should tell the audience um why, you know, your brow is audience um why, you know, your brow is audience um why, you know, your brow is f is furrowed and I'm excited about this f is furrowed and I'm excited about this f is furrowed and I'm excited about this because half a millisecond is less than because half a millisecond is less than because half a millisecond is less than the duration of a single action the duration of a single action the duration of a single action potential, &gt;&gt; right? And we should just remind people &gt;&gt; right? And we should just remind people &gt;&gt; right? And we should just remind people action potentials are the electrical action potentials are the electrical action potentials are the electrical signals that neurons use to communicate signals that neurons use to communicate signals that neurons use to communicate with one another. These are the uh with one another. These are the uh with one another. These are the uh the fundamental the fundamental the fundamental um way in which our brain works. Without um way in which our brain works. Without um way in which our brain works. Without these, we're dead. these, we're dead. these, we're dead. &gt;&gt; It's the fundamental medium of &gt;&gt; It's the fundamental medium of &gt;&gt; It's the fundamental medium of communication um in the nervous system communication um in the nervous system communication um in the nervous system as you say. So, it would seem totally as you say. So, it would seem totally as you say. So, it would seem totally weird for us to be able to process weird for us to be able to process weird for us to be able to process sensory information that is faster than sensory information that is faster than sensory information that is faster than the duration of that minimum increment the duration of that minimum increment the duration of that minimum increment of firing. You know, there's some of firing. You know, there's some of firing. You know, there's some research about how exactly this can be research about how exactly this can be research about how exactly this can be done and it involves things like lots of done and it involves things like lots of done and it involves things like lots of neurons firing together and really neurons firing together and really neurons firing together and really precise uh synapses that um cause precise uh synapses that um cause precise uh synapses that um cause minimal delay and very high temporal minimal delay and very high temporal minimal delay and very high temporal precision as the signals are going from precision as the signals are going from precision as the signals are going from one neuron to the next. one neuron to the next. one neuron to the next. Glucose is a key player in how our body Glucose is a key player in how our body Glucose is a key player in how our body functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman Visit hellolingo.com/huberman for more information. Today's episode is for more information. Today's episode is for more information. Today's episode is also brought to us by Wealthfront. In also brought to us by Wealthfront. In also brought to us by Wealthfront. In today's financial landscape of constant today's financial landscape of constant today's financial landscape of constant market shifts and chaotic news, it's market shifts and chaotic news, it's market shifts and chaotic news, it's easy to feel uncertain about where to easy to feel uncertain about where to easy to feel uncertain about where to keep your money. However, saving and keep your money. However, saving and keep your money. However, saving and investing does not have to be investing does not have to be investing does not have to be complicated. There's a solution that can complicated. There's a solution that can complicated. There's a solution that can help you take control of your finances help you take control of your finances help you take control of your finances while still managing risk, and that's while still managing risk, and that's while still managing risk, and that's Wealthfront. I've trusted Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've trusted Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've trusted Wealthfront with my finances for nearly a decade. with my finances for nearly a decade. with my finances for nearly a decade. With the Wealthfront cash account, I can With the Wealthfront cash account, I can With the Wealthfront cash account, I can earn 3.5% annual percentage yield or APY earn 3.5% annual percentage yield or APY earn 3.5% annual percentage yield or APY on my cash from program banks. and I on my cash from program banks. and I on my cash from program banks. and I know my money is growing until I'm ready know my money is growing until I'm ready know my money is growing until I'm ready to spend it or invest it. One of the to spend it or invest it. One of the to spend it or invest it. One of the features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is that I have access to instant no fee that I have access to instant no fee that I have access to instant no fee withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. withdrawals to eligible accounts 24/7. That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of their expert built portfolios. For a their expert built portfolios. For a their expert built portfolios. For a limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering new clients an additional 065% boost new clients an additional 065% boost new clients an additional 065% boost over the base rate for three months, over the base rate for three months, over the base rate for three months, meaning you can get up to 4.15% variable meaning you can get up to 4.15% variable meaning you can get up to 4.15% variable APY on up to $150,000 in deposits. More APY on up to $150,000 in deposits. More APY on up to $150,000 in deposits. More than 1 million people already trust than 1 million people already trust than 1 million people already trust Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth with confidence. build long-term wealth with confidence. build long-term wealth with confidence. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive the boosted APY offer and to receive the boosted APY offer and to receive the boosted APY offer and start earning 4.15% variable APY today. start earning 4.15% variable APY today. start earning 4.15% variable APY today. That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is as of November 7th, 2025 and is subject as of November 7th, 2025 and is subject as of November 7th, 2025 and is subject to change. For more information, please to change. For more information, please to change. For more information, please see the episode description. So, you see the episode description. So, you see the episode description. So, you know, if my finger snaps up with my know, if my finger snaps up with my know, if my finger snaps up with my right hand, which is what I just did, right hand, which is what I just did, right hand, which is what I just did, you know, intuitively I know that the you know, intuitively I know that the you know, intuitively I know that the it's my right hand because I did it. But it's my right hand because I did it. But it's my right hand because I did it. But my brain expects that sound to arrive my brain expects that sound to arrive my brain expects that sound to arrive more quickly to my right ear than my more quickly to my right ear than my more quickly to my right ear than my left ear, left ear, left ear, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And yet for things directly in front of &gt;&gt; And yet for things directly in front of &gt;&gt; And yet for things directly in front of me, &gt;&gt; right at my nose, the idea that it's &gt;&gt; right at my nose, the idea that it's &gt;&gt; right at my nose, the idea that it's right in front of me, let's say with my right in front of me, let's say with my right in front of me, let's say with my eyes closed, I know to look in front eyes closed, I know to look in front eyes closed, I know to look in front of me. I know to expect it in front of me. I know to expect it in front of me. I know to expect it in front of me once I open my eyes. Right. me once I open my eyes. Right. me once I open my eyes. Right. &gt;&gt; Are there conditions where we think we &gt;&gt; Are there conditions where we think we &gt;&gt; Are there conditions where we think we hear something from one location but hear something from one location but hear something from one location but it's actually arising from another it's actually arising from another it's actually arising from another location that's outside an experimental location that's outside an experimental location that's outside an experimental context? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So if you have hearing loss &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So if you have hearing loss &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So if you have hearing loss in one ear in one ear in one ear &gt;&gt; uh and one ear only then um it it's very &gt;&gt; uh and one ear only then um it it's very &gt;&gt; uh and one ear only then um it it's very difficult to localize sound. difficult to localize sound. difficult to localize sound. &gt;&gt; It's not completely impossible. You &gt;&gt; It's not completely impossible. You &gt;&gt; It's not completely impossible. You would imagine that it would be would imagine that it would be would imagine that it would be completely impossible if the hearing completely impossible if the hearing completely impossible if the hearing loss was complete and if this timing loss was complete and if this timing loss was complete and if this timing difference and level difference were the difference and level difference were the difference and level difference were the only cues that we use. only cues that we use. only cues that we use. &gt;&gt; But actually the ear has these little &gt;&gt; But actually the ear has these little &gt;&gt; But actually the ear has these little folds in them and the folds filter the folds in them and the folds filter the folds in them and the folds filter the sound as it comes in. Uh and in sound as it comes in. Uh and in sound as it comes in. Uh and in particular it alters the frequency particular it alters the frequency particular it alters the frequency content of the sound content of the sound content of the sound &gt;&gt; really. So these little dimples inside &gt;&gt; really. So these little dimples inside &gt;&gt; really. So these little dimples inside my ears are useful for something. my ears are useful for something. my ears are useful for something. &gt;&gt; They're useful and your ears are &gt;&gt; They're useful and your ears are &gt;&gt; They're useful and your ears are different than my ears. Um, and so you different than my ears. Um, and so you different than my ears. Um, and so you are going to be expecting a slightly are going to be expecting a slightly are going to be expecting a slightly different kind of fingerprint of what different kind of fingerprint of what different kind of fingerprint of what the sound sounds like the sound sounds like the sound sounds like &gt;&gt; as a function of location than I would &gt;&gt; as a function of location than I would &gt;&gt; as a function of location than I would be. &gt;&gt; Do people with damage to their ears &gt;&gt; Do people with damage to their ears &gt;&gt; Do people with damage to their ears &gt;&gt; have issues hearing? I mean, it sounds &gt;&gt; have issues hearing? I mean, it sounds &gt;&gt; have issues hearing? I mean, it sounds like sort of a they must. Um, but like sort of a they must. Um, but like sort of a they must. Um, but like the people I know that roll jiu-jitsu, the people I know that roll jiu-jitsu, the people I know that roll jiu-jitsu, the wrestlers, their ears are always the wrestlers, their ears are always the wrestlers, their ears are always beat up. Okay. beat up. Okay. beat up. Okay. &gt;&gt; They basically don't have these folds. &gt;&gt; They basically don't have these folds. &gt;&gt; They basically don't have these folds. It's just kind of Yeah. interesting. Um It's just kind of Yeah. interesting. Um It's just kind of Yeah. interesting. Um I don't know of any studies but I think I don't know of any studies but I think I don't know of any studies but I think we can predict from first principles we can predict from first principles we can predict from first principles that they would have an initial deficit that they would have an initial deficit that they would have an initial deficit &gt;&gt; uh and that very likely they would learn &gt;&gt; uh and that very likely they would learn &gt;&gt; uh and that very likely they would learn to adapt um and they would kind of learn to adapt um and they would kind of learn to adapt um and they would kind of learn their new set of ears and what their new set of ears and what their new set of ears and what particular frequency pattern to expect particular frequency pattern to expect particular frequency pattern to expect from that. from that. from that. &gt;&gt; If if the auditory system is so &gt;&gt; If if the auditory system is so &gt;&gt; If if the auditory system is so sensitive, why is it that I don't really hear my why is it that I don't really hear my why is it that I don't really hear my own voice? Um, or if I talk out one side own voice? Um, or if I talk out one side own voice? Um, or if I talk out one side of my mouth, I sort of know I'm doing, of my mouth, I sort of know I'm doing, of my mouth, I sort of know I'm doing, but it doesn't throw me off. but it doesn't throw me off. but it doesn't throw me off. Doesn't throw me off. And yet, Doesn't throw me off. And yet, Doesn't throw me off. And yet, &gt;&gt; most people have the experience of &gt;&gt; most people have the experience of &gt;&gt; most people have the experience of &gt;&gt; watching themselves or hearing &gt;&gt; watching themselves or hearing &gt;&gt; watching themselves or hearing themselves speak and it feels awkward. themselves speak and it feels awkward. themselves speak and it feels awkward. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; We don't really like I suppose there are &gt;&gt; We don't really like I suppose there are &gt;&gt; We don't really like I suppose there are some people on the planet that like to some people on the planet that like to some people on the planet that like to hear themselves speak, but most people hear themselves speak, but most people hear themselves speak, but most people don't. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Most people are not it. It sound It's &gt;&gt; Most people are not it. It sound It's &gt;&gt; Most people are not it. It sound It's like we cancel ourselves out while we like we cancel ourselves out while we like we cancel ourselves out while we speak. Yeah. speak. Yeah. speak. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But then when it's coming at us from the &gt;&gt; But then when it's coming at us from the &gt;&gt; But then when it's coming at us from the front, it's like it's front, it's like it's front, it's like it's &gt;&gt; Do you like listening to this podcast or &gt;&gt; Do you like listening to this podcast or &gt;&gt; Do you like listening to this podcast or do you do you do you &gt;&gt; Well, I listen to all the podcasts to &gt;&gt; Well, I listen to all the podcasts to &gt;&gt; Well, I listen to all the podcasts to see ways that I can improve. see ways that I can improve. see ways that I can improve. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and I like the content that my guests &gt;&gt; Um and I like the content that my guests &gt;&gt; Um and I like the content that my guests bring on and I like the topics. bring on and I like the topics. bring on and I like the topics. &gt;&gt; But it's an awkward feeling, isn't it? &gt;&gt; But it's an awkward feeling, isn't it? &gt;&gt; But it's an awkward feeling, isn't it? To listen to yourself is very awkward. To listen to yourself is very awkward. To listen to yourself is very awkward. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's uncomfortable. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's uncomfortable. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's uncomfortable. It's uncomfortable. &gt;&gt; Before I answer that question, which is &gt;&gt; Before I answer that question, which is &gt;&gt; Before I answer that question, which is a really interesting question, I want to a really interesting question, I want to a really interesting question, I want to loop back to the uh do we have to learn loop back to the uh do we have to learn loop back to the uh do we have to learn this? The the other thing um to say this? The the other thing um to say this? The the other thing um to say about learning uh learning how to about learning uh learning how to about learning uh learning how to interpret these the timing difference interpret these the timing difference interpret these the timing difference cues and the level difference cues and the level difference cues and the level difference cues is that a baby's head is about half the is that a baby's head is about half the is that a baby's head is about half the width of an adult's head. width of an adult's head. width of an adult's head. &gt;&gt; So that means that you know half &gt;&gt; So that means that you know half &gt;&gt; So that means that you know half millisecond for me is you know a quarter millisecond for me is you know a quarter millisecond for me is you know a quarter of a millisecond for a baby and it's of a millisecond for a baby and it's of a millisecond for a baby and it's going to change as they grow. So that's going to change as they grow. So that's going to change as they grow. So that's why you have to do all this learning. why you have to do all this learning. why you have to do all this learning. &gt;&gt; With respect to the question you just &gt;&gt; With respect to the question you just &gt;&gt; With respect to the question you just asked about like why our voices sound asked about like why our voices sound asked about like why our voices sound weird, I can say more about why they weird, I can say more about why they weird, I can say more about why they sound weird and less about why we sound weird and less about why we sound weird and less about why we experience it is kind of unpleasant. experience it is kind of unpleasant. experience it is kind of unpleasant. Maybe that the weird and unpleasant Maybe that the weird and unpleasant Maybe that the weird and unpleasant connection is because um we're just so connection is because um we're just so connection is because um we're just so used to the way it actually the way it's used to the way it actually the way it's used to the way it actually the way it's the way we experience it that to hear it the way we experience it that to hear it the way we experience it that to hear it recorded is going to be unfamiliar and recorded is going to be unfamiliar and recorded is going to be unfamiliar and strange. I think there's going to be strange. I think there's going to be strange. I think there's going to be three things. Number one, the recording three things. Number one, the recording three things. Number one, the recording is not going to capture the full is not going to capture the full is not going to capture the full spectrum of frequency content of your spectrum of frequency content of your spectrum of frequency content of your voice. &gt;&gt; Number two, your brain has an active &gt;&gt; Number two, your brain has an active &gt;&gt; Number two, your brain has an active mechanism for manipulating the mechanism for manipulating the mechanism for manipulating the transduction of sound in your ears. That transduction of sound in your ears. That transduction of sound in your ears. That is to say, the conversion of sound into is to say, the conversion of sound into is to say, the conversion of sound into a neur neural signal that's going to go a neur neural signal that's going to go a neur neural signal that's going to go into the brain. So, your brain actually into the brain. So, your brain actually into the brain. So, your brain actually controls that process. Um, and there's controls that process. Um, and there's controls that process. Um, and there's some thinking that it's, you know, some thinking that it's, you know, some thinking that it's, you know, turning down the volume just before you turning down the volume just before you turning down the volume just before you speak so that you don't get blasted by speak so that you don't get blasted by speak so that you don't get blasted by the sound of your own voice. the sound of your own voice. the sound of your own voice. &gt;&gt; If you think about it, like if I were &gt;&gt; If you think about it, like if I were &gt;&gt; If you think about it, like if I were speaking at this volume with my mouth speaking at this volume with my mouth speaking at this volume with my mouth this far away from my ear, like if I was this far away from my ear, like if I was this far away from my ear, like if I was speaking at this volume from here or speaking at this volume from here or speaking at this volume from here or somebody else was speaking at this somebody else was speaking at this somebody else was speaking at this volume from here, it'd be too loud. volume from here, it'd be too loud. volume from here, it'd be too loud. &gt;&gt; Got it. So for those just listening, so &gt;&gt; Got it. So for those just listening, so &gt;&gt; Got it. So for those just listening, so uh Jenny's, uh referring to So the uh Jenny's, uh referring to So the uh Jenny's, uh referring to So the distance between your mouth and your ear distance between your mouth and your ear distance between your mouth and your ear is a very short one. And if someone were is a very short one. And if someone were is a very short one. And if someone were to speak into your ear at that distance, to speak into your ear at that distance, to speak into your ear at that distance, I suppose unless they were telling you I suppose unless they were telling you I suppose unless they were telling you something you really wanted to hear, something you really wanted to hear, something you really wanted to hear, you'd probably feel like, "Hey, get out you'd probably feel like, "Hey, get out you'd probably feel like, "Hey, get out of my personal space." of my personal space." of my personal space." &gt;&gt; You'd want somebody to speak a little &gt;&gt; You'd want somebody to speak a little &gt;&gt; You'd want somebody to speak a little more softly. more softly. more softly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And yet we're doing it all the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And yet we're doing it all the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And yet we're doing it all the time. &gt;&gt; All the time. &gt;&gt; All the time. &gt;&gt; All the time. &gt;&gt; It's just that we're projecting it &gt;&gt; It's just that we're projecting it &gt;&gt; It's just that we're projecting it outward. Well, we're projecting it outward. Well, we're projecting it outward. Well, we're projecting it outward and our brain is turning down outward and our brain is turning down outward and our brain is turning down the volume um in anticipation of what the volume um in anticipation of what the volume um in anticipation of what we're what we're saying. we're what we're saying. we're what we're saying. &gt;&gt; So, it's a very, you know, potentially &gt;&gt; So, it's a very, you know, potentially &gt;&gt; So, it's a very, you know, potentially it could be a very precisely timed it could be a very precisely timed it could be a very precisely timed volume knob that is going with each volume knob that is going with each volume knob that is going with each little word that I say. little word that I say. little word that I say. &gt;&gt; So, when the psychologists say that we &gt;&gt; So, when the psychologists say that we &gt;&gt; So, when the psychologists say that we can't speak and hear at the same time, can't speak and hear at the same time, can't speak and hear at the same time, they're 100% accurate. they're 100% accurate. they're 100% accurate. &gt;&gt; Probably &gt;&gt; Probably &gt;&gt; Probably &gt;&gt; we can't speak and hear correctly. &gt;&gt; we can't speak and hear correctly. &gt;&gt; we can't speak and hear correctly. &gt;&gt; We cannot. And then the third thing is &gt;&gt; We cannot. And then the third thing is &gt;&gt; We cannot. And then the third thing is that this maybe goes back to the first that this maybe goes back to the first that this maybe goes back to the first point about the recording doesn't point about the recording doesn't point about the recording doesn't capture all of it is that some of what capture all of it is that some of what capture all of it is that some of what um we are picking up is actually through um we are picking up is actually through um we are picking up is actually through bone conduction. You may have bone conduction. You may have bone conduction. You may have bone conduction uh headphones. I certainly conduction uh headphones. I certainly conduction uh headphones. I certainly do. These are headphones that um they're do. These are headphones that um they're do. These are headphones that um they're they don't go over the ears. They don't they don't go over the ears. They don't they don't go over the ears. They don't go in the ears. They're usually go in the ears. They're usually go in the ears. They're usually positioned right in front of the ears positioned right in front of the ears positioned right in front of the ears delivering the vibration signals to the delivering the vibration signals to the delivering the vibration signals to the bone right in front of your ear. And bone right in front of your ear. And bone right in front of your ear. And that can get transmitted into your ears that can get transmitted into your ears that can get transmitted into your ears as well. as well. as well. &gt;&gt; You have these headphones. &gt;&gt; You have these headphones. &gt;&gt; You have these headphones. &gt;&gt; I have these. I have these. &gt;&gt; I have these. I have these. &gt;&gt; I have these. I have these. &gt;&gt; Why do you use these instead of in ear &gt;&gt; Why do you use these instead of in ear &gt;&gt; Why do you use these instead of in ear ear? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Cuz it leaves my ears open so I can hear &gt;&gt; Cuz it leaves my ears open so I can hear &gt;&gt; Cuz it leaves my ears open so I can hear something else. So that's safer if something else. So that's safer if something else. So that's safer if you're out exercising somewhere where you're out exercising somewhere where you're out exercising somewhere where there might be traffic or something like there might be traffic or something like there might be traffic or something like that. &gt;&gt; I get a lot of questions about &gt;&gt; I get a lot of questions about &gt;&gt; I get a lot of questions about headphones and safety. And uh one thing headphones and safety. And uh one thing headphones and safety. And uh one thing that uh we resolved recently on the that uh we resolved recently on the that uh we resolved recently on the podcast, we had a guest on who's a our podcast, we had a guest on who's a our podcast, we had a guest on who's a our chair of autoangology at Stanford and chair of autoangology at Stanford and chair of autoangology at Stanford and &gt;&gt; she said that if your headphones are &gt;&gt; she said that if your headphones are &gt;&gt; she said that if your headphones are loud enough that somebody besides you loud enough that somebody besides you loud enough that somebody besides you can hear can hear can hear &gt;&gt; that there is a sound, not even the &gt;&gt; that there is a sound, not even the &gt;&gt; that there is a sound, not even the specific sounds. specific sounds. specific sounds. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh you are inflicting hearing damage, &gt;&gt; Uh you are inflicting hearing damage, &gt;&gt; Uh you are inflicting hearing damage, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Probably permanent hearing loss at some &gt;&gt; Probably permanent hearing loss at some &gt;&gt; Probably permanent hearing loss at some level. that yeah that she sets a level. that yeah that she sets a level. that yeah that she sets a pretty low threshold for um kind of like pretty low threshold for um kind of like pretty low threshold for um kind of like be careful but it seems important given be careful but it seems important given be careful but it seems important given that &gt;&gt; we now know hearing loss is correlated &gt;&gt; we now know hearing loss is correlated &gt;&gt; we now know hearing loss is correlated with dementia with dementia with dementia &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; it makes sense less sensory information &gt;&gt; it makes sense less sensory information &gt;&gt; it makes sense less sensory information comes in the brain probably says well comes in the brain probably says well comes in the brain probably says well there's less stuff coming in and starts there's less stuff coming in and starts there's less stuff coming in and starts turning off circuits turning off circuits turning off circuits &gt;&gt; and then memory goes and attention goes &gt;&gt; and then memory goes and attention goes &gt;&gt; and then memory goes and attention goes and there are other things obviously and there are other things obviously and there are other things obviously that can impact dementia but um so it's that can impact dementia but um so it's that can impact dementia but um so it's interesting um the other question I get interesting um the other question I get interesting um the other question I get a lot um is uh about the Bluetooth a lot um is uh about the Bluetooth a lot um is uh about the Bluetooth &gt;&gt; earphones. People want to know are they &gt;&gt; earphones. People want to know are they &gt;&gt; earphones. People want to know are they safe? Is it safe to have this like safe? Is it safe to have this like safe? Is it safe to have this like Bluetooth arc, you know, in your ears Bluetooth arc, you know, in your ears Bluetooth arc, you know, in your ears and uh we had a guest on here uh Matt and uh we had a guest on here uh Matt and uh we had a guest on here uh Matt McDougall who's the McDougall who's the McDougall who's the &gt;&gt; neurosurgeon at Neurolink, &gt;&gt; neurosurgeon at Neurolink, &gt;&gt; neurosurgeon at Neurolink, &gt;&gt; they're big on Bluetooth, Neurolink, but &gt;&gt; they're big on Bluetooth, Neurolink, but &gt;&gt; they're big on Bluetooth, Neurolink, but he said that the amount of uh radiation he said that the amount of uh radiation he said that the amount of uh radiation coming from those Bluetooth headphones coming from those Bluetooth headphones coming from those Bluetooth headphones &gt;&gt; is considerably lower than &gt;&gt; is considerably lower than &gt;&gt; is considerably lower than &gt;&gt; the sort of radiation that you're &gt;&gt; the sort of radiation that you're &gt;&gt; the sort of radiation that you're exposed to all day every day. So he exposed to all day every day. So he exposed to all day every day. So he wasn't concerned. Are you aware of any wasn't concerned. Are you aware of any wasn't concerned. Are you aware of any impact of heat? impact of heat? impact of heat? &gt;&gt; I'm not look looking to go after EMF &gt;&gt; I'm not look looking to go after EMF &gt;&gt; I'm not look looking to go after EMF here if there isn't anything there, but here if there isn't anything there, but here if there isn't anything there, but of heat or of just having um EMF but of heat or of just having um EMF but of heat or of just having um EMF around your given the sensitivity of the around your given the sensitivity of the around your given the sensitivity of the bone. I mean, I'm just amazed that you bone. I mean, I'm just amazed that you bone. I mean, I'm just amazed that you can pick up sound from the bone can pick up sound from the bone can pick up sound from the bone vibrations. I mean, this is a very vibrations. I mean, this is a very vibrations. I mean, this is a very sensitive &gt;&gt; neural uh sensory space is what I'm &gt;&gt; neural uh sensory space is what I'm &gt;&gt; neural uh sensory space is what I'm realizing. &gt;&gt; Right. I do think that there's um &gt;&gt; Right. I do think that there's um &gt;&gt; Right. I do think that there's um concerns about just how much sound concerns about just how much sound concerns about just how much sound exposure people are accumulating. exposure people are accumulating. exposure people are accumulating. &gt;&gt; If we live long enough, 80% of us will &gt;&gt; If we live long enough, 80% of us will &gt;&gt; If we live long enough, 80% of us will get hearing loss at some point in our get hearing loss at some point in our get hearing loss at some point in our lives. &gt;&gt; Bummer. &gt;&gt; Bummer. &gt;&gt; Bummer. &gt;&gt; So, it's a big problem. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So, it's a big problem. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So, it's a big problem. Mhm. &gt;&gt; There's certainly concerns that young &gt;&gt; There's certainly concerns that young &gt;&gt; There's certainly concerns that young people are farther along on that people are farther along on that people are farther along on that trajectory to hearing loss than people trajectory to hearing loss than people trajectory to hearing loss than people from older generations were at a from older generations were at a from older generations were at a comparable age. comparable age. comparable age. &gt;&gt; Um just because there's, you know, the &gt;&gt; Um just because there's, you know, the &gt;&gt; Um just because there's, you know, the earbuds are in from morning to night and earbuds are in from morning to night and earbuds are in from morning to night and volume turned up loud enough to block volume turned up loud enough to block volume turned up loud enough to block out surrounding sound. You know, if out surrounding sound. You know, if out surrounding sound. You know, if you're in a you're in a you're in a &gt;&gt; a loud environment, I would encourage &gt;&gt; a loud environment, I would encourage &gt;&gt; a loud environment, I would encourage people to give some consideration to people to give some consideration to people to give some consideration to noise cancelling headphones and to not noise cancelling headphones and to not noise cancelling headphones and to not having the volume be turned up too loud. having the volume be turned up too loud. having the volume be turned up too loud. &gt;&gt; Like to talk about the experience of &gt;&gt; Like to talk about the experience of &gt;&gt; Like to talk about the experience of listening to something, listening to something, listening to something, &gt;&gt; music, let's say, through headphones &gt;&gt; music, let's say, through headphones &gt;&gt; music, let's say, through headphones versus in the room. versus in the room. versus in the room. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; We don't think about it too often, but &gt;&gt; We don't think about it too often, but &gt;&gt; We don't think about it too often, but it's a totally different experience. In it's a totally different experience. In it's a totally different experience. In one case, you're hearing the sound in one case, you're hearing the sound in one case, you're hearing the sound in your head. your head. your head. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. or even listen, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. or even listen, you know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. or even listen, you know, like your phone on speaker versus like your phone on speaker versus like your phone on speaker versus wearing earphones, wearing earphones, wearing earphones, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; The person's voice or the music is in &gt;&gt; The person's voice or the music is in &gt;&gt; The person's voice or the music is in your head as opposed to in the room, your head as opposed to in the room, your head as opposed to in the room, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And once you think about this &gt;&gt; And once you think about this &gt;&gt; And once you think about this difference, I simply can't go back. difference, I simply can't go back. difference, I simply can't go back. It's like a It's like a It's like a &gt;&gt; you like the full actual speakers. &gt;&gt; you like the full actual speakers. &gt;&gt; you like the full actual speakers. &gt;&gt; Well, you now I try to listen to music &gt;&gt; Well, you now I try to listen to music &gt;&gt; Well, you now I try to listen to music in the room. in the room. in the room. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I find that to be a &gt;&gt; I find that to be a &gt;&gt; I find that to be a &gt;&gt; better experience for me. But &gt;&gt; better experience for me. But &gt;&gt; better experience for me. But when I hear things with headphones, I when I hear things with headphones, I when I hear things with headphones, I now feel like, oh, like the sound is now feel like, oh, like the sound is now feel like, oh, like the sound is coming from inside my head. And it it's coming from inside my head. And it it's coming from inside my head. And it it's a little weird. I don't like it so much. a little weird. I don't like it so much. a little weird. I don't like it so much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. It is possible to make &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. It is possible to make &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. It is possible to make sound that is coming from headphones sound that is coming from headphones sound that is coming from headphones sound like it is coming from outside. sound like it is coming from outside. sound like it is coming from outside. But to do that, you have to use all But to do that, you have to use all But to do that, you have to use all three of these sound localization cues. three of these sound localization cues. three of these sound localization cues. um things have to be, you know, to have um things have to be, you know, to have um things have to be, you know, to have a an appropriate timing difference, an a an appropriate timing difference, an a an appropriate timing difference, an appropriate level difference across the appropriate level difference across the appropriate level difference across the two ears, uh and to use the two ears, uh and to use the two ears, uh and to use the frequency filtering properties of the frequency filtering properties of the frequency filtering properties of the ear. And since everybody's ears are a ear. And since everybody's ears are a ear. And since everybody's ears are a little bit different, that last step is little bit different, that last step is little bit different, that last step is really hard. really hard. really hard. &gt;&gt; But there is 3D sound, right? &gt;&gt; But there is 3D sound, right? &gt;&gt; But there is 3D sound, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like we think about like &gt;&gt; Like we think about like &gt;&gt; Like we think about like three-dimensional vision is simple for three-dimensional vision is simple for three-dimensional vision is simple for people to think about. As long as people to think about. As long as people to think about. As long as they're cited, you understand that, you they're cited, you understand that, you they're cited, you understand that, you know, you expect things that are closer know, you expect things that are closer know, you expect things that are closer to you to be larger. to you to be larger. to you to be larger. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Than if they were far away that we &gt;&gt; Than if they were far away that we &gt;&gt; Than if they were far away that we learn this without learn this without learn this without &gt;&gt; so many wonderful cues to distance in &gt;&gt; so many wonderful cues to distance in &gt;&gt; so many wonderful cues to distance in vision, right? vision, right? vision, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Things in the distance are harder &gt;&gt; Yeah. Things in the distance are harder &gt;&gt; Yeah. Things in the distance are harder to resolve as opposed to things up close to resolve as opposed to things up close to resolve as opposed to things up close which you can see all the detail. And which you can see all the detail. And which you can see all the detail. And there are all these cues, right, that we there are all these cues, right, that we there are all these cues, right, that we could talk about. But since we're could talk about. But since we're could talk about. But since we're talking about hearing, talking about hearing, talking about hearing, &gt;&gt; the &gt;&gt; the &gt;&gt; the &gt;&gt; sounds that we &gt;&gt; sounds that we &gt;&gt; sounds that we hear at a given level, we know are close hear at a given level, we know are close hear at a given level, we know are close are coming from objects that are coming from objects that are coming from objects that are actually close or far away, actually close or far away, actually close or far away, &gt;&gt; usually based on what we see. &gt;&gt; usually based on what we see. &gt;&gt; usually based on what we see. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. So, what is 3D sound? How how do &gt;&gt; Right. So, what is 3D sound? How how do &gt;&gt; Right. So, what is 3D sound? How how do I know the difference between a sound I know the difference between a sound I know the difference between a sound that's right in front of my face with that's right in front of my face with that's right in front of my face with versus far away with my eyes closed? How versus far away with my eyes closed? How versus far away with my eyes closed? How do I know? This is a computational do I know? This is a computational do I know? This is a computational process in the brain that we don't fully process in the brain that we don't fully process in the brain that we don't fully understand. And it's worth thinking understand. And it's worth thinking understand. And it's worth thinking about what are what are the available about what are what are the available about what are what are the available pieces of information that you can use. pieces of information that you can use. pieces of information that you can use. Sound is much more bendy than light is Sound is much more bendy than light is Sound is much more bendy than light is &gt;&gt; bendy. &gt;&gt; bendy. &gt;&gt; bendy. &gt;&gt; Bendy like it bends, right? It goes &gt;&gt; Bendy like it bends, right? It goes &gt;&gt; Bendy like it bends, right? It goes around things. Whereas light is just around things. Whereas light is just around things. Whereas light is just kind of like a straight shot. kind of like a straight shot. kind of like a straight shot. You know, You know, You know, &gt;&gt; you don't have the opportunity to use &gt;&gt; you don't have the opportunity to use &gt;&gt; you don't have the opportunity to use the same kind of information for sound the same kind of information for sound the same kind of information for sound depth that you do for vision. Um, even depth that you do for vision. Um, even depth that you do for vision. Um, even though you have two ears, you can't form though you have two ears, you can't form though you have two ears, you can't form an image and check to see whether or not an image and check to see whether or not an image and check to see whether or not the images line up, which is what stereo the images line up, which is what stereo the images line up, which is what stereo vision is. vision is. vision is. &gt;&gt; You don't have occlusion cues. That is &gt;&gt; You don't have occlusion cues. That is &gt;&gt; You don't have occlusion cues. That is to say, one thing being in front of the to say, one thing being in front of the to say, one thing being in front of the other blocks your ability to see other blocks your ability to see other blocks your ability to see the thing that's behind. the thing that's behind. the thing that's behind. &gt;&gt; So, you know, the sound can go around &gt;&gt; So, you know, the sound can go around &gt;&gt; So, you know, the sound can go around objects. &gt;&gt; So, there's a few different cues that we &gt;&gt; So, there's a few different cues that we &gt;&gt; So, there's a few different cues that we can use. Uh, one is simply how loud is can use. Uh, one is simply how loud is can use. Uh, one is simply how loud is the sound. Mhm. the sound. Mhm. the sound. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um, things that are farther away are &gt;&gt; Um, things that are farther away are &gt;&gt; Um, things that are farther away are going to sound quieter. going to sound quieter. going to sound quieter. But you have to know what the sound But you have to know what the sound But you have to know what the sound volume was volume was volume was out there in the world in order to out there in the world in order to out there in the world in order to interpret whether or not that is quiet interpret whether or not that is quiet interpret whether or not that is quiet or loud. or loud. or loud. &gt;&gt; Let's use thunder as an example because &gt;&gt; Let's use thunder as an example because &gt;&gt; Let's use thunder as an example because thunder sounding very loud predicts thunder sounding very loud predicts thunder sounding very loud predicts lightning that might hit you. Thunder lightning that might hit you. Thunder lightning that might hit you. Thunder that sounds way off in the distance. If that sounds way off in the distance. If that sounds way off in the distance. If you have an understanding of thunder and you have an understanding of thunder and you have an understanding of thunder and lightning predicts a lower probability lightning predicts a lower probability lightning predicts a lower probability of you getting hit by lightning. I had of you getting hit by lightning. I had of you getting hit by lightning. I had this experience recently. I got caught this experience recently. I got caught this experience recently. I got caught in a sudden uh lightning storm thunder in a sudden uh lightning storm thunder in a sudden uh lightning storm thunder lightning storm in Austin, Texas and it lightning storm in Austin, Texas and it lightning storm in Austin, Texas and it was coming down in sheets and then you was coming down in sheets and then you was coming down in sheets and then you know and the thunder gets louder and know and the thunder gets louder and know and the thunder gets louder and louder and you're like wow and then louder and you're like wow and then louder and you're like wow and then the lightning gets brighter and brighter the lightning gets brighter and brighter the lightning gets brighter and brighter and you think I could get electrocuted and you think I could get electrocuted and you think I could get electrocuted &gt;&gt; and uh seems like a low probability &gt;&gt; and uh seems like a low probability &gt;&gt; and uh seems like a low probability event, &gt;&gt; right? Depending on where you grew up. &gt;&gt; right? Depending on where you grew up. &gt;&gt; right? Depending on where you grew up. Um, you might have learned as a child Um, you might have learned as a child Um, you might have learned as a child like some basics of how to tell like some basics of how to tell like some basics of how to tell like when it's good idea to, you know, get to when it's good idea to, you know, get to when it's good idea to, you know, get to shelter. Um, so, you know, for example, shelter. Um, so, you know, for example, shelter. Um, so, you know, for example, I was taught growing up, you know, you I was taught growing up, you know, you I was taught growing up, you know, you count 1 1,00 2 1,00 whatever. As long as count 1 1,00 2 1,00 whatever. As long as count 1 1,00 2 1,00 whatever. As long as you can count to like 5 seconds, you're you can count to like 5 seconds, you're you can count to like 5 seconds, you're probably okay. But once you're getting probably okay. But once you're getting probably okay. But once you're getting to that level, you should, you know, to that level, you should, you know, to that level, you should, you know, maybe go inside maybe go inside maybe go inside &gt;&gt; there. Let take that. Take that one in, &gt;&gt; there. Let take that. Take that one in, &gt;&gt; there. Let take that. Take that one in, folks. from somebody who grew up with folks. from somebody who grew up with folks. from somebody who grew up with them. [laughter] You see the flash of them. [laughter] You see the flash of them. [laughter] You see the flash of lightning. &gt;&gt; 1 2 100 3 100 4 100 5 100. And if it &gt;&gt; 1 2 100 3 100 4 100 5 100. And if it &gt;&gt; 1 2 100 3 100 4 100 5 100. And if it takes longer than that before you hear takes longer than that before you hear takes longer than that before you hear the thunder, you're okay. But at that the thunder, you're okay. But at that the thunder, you're okay. But at that point, I would go inside. point, I would go inside. point, I would go inside. &gt;&gt; You may have saved some lives. &gt;&gt; You may have saved some lives. &gt;&gt; You may have saved some lives. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. Growing up in California, we &gt;&gt; Yeah. Growing up in California, we &gt;&gt; Yeah. Growing up in California, we didn't learn anything about it. didn't learn anything about it. didn't learn anything about it. &gt;&gt; You didn't get that. And people who grew &gt;&gt; You didn't get that. And people who grew &gt;&gt; You didn't get that. And people who grew up in cities wouldn't have gotten this. up in cities wouldn't have gotten this. up in cities wouldn't have gotten this. I think in cities, it's actually very I think in cities, it's actually very I think in cities, it's actually very hard to see the connection between the hard to see the connection between the hard to see the connection between the light lightning and the thunder. Mhm. light lightning and the thunder. Mhm. light lightning and the thunder. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um, but I grew up in rural Vermont and &gt;&gt; Um, but I grew up in rural Vermont and &gt;&gt; Um, but I grew up in rural Vermont and it was like very obvious. it was like very obvious. it was like very obvious. &gt;&gt; I grew up in the San Francisco Bay area &gt;&gt; I grew up in the San Francisco Bay area &gt;&gt; I grew up in the San Francisco Bay area and I've been through so many and I've been through so many and I've been through so many earthquakes. And one of the things that earthquakes. And one of the things that earthquakes. And one of the things that &gt;&gt; uh people don't realize if they've never &gt;&gt; uh people don't realize if they've never &gt;&gt; uh people don't realize if they've never been in a major earthquake is that been in a major earthquake is that been in a major earthquake is that &gt;&gt; it's extremely loud. It starts with &gt;&gt; it's extremely loud. It starts with &gt;&gt; it's extremely loud. It starts with sound, not shaking. You don't you don't sound, not shaking. You don't you don't sound, not shaking. You don't you don't sure. So this is people always think sure. So this is people always think sure. So this is people always think California earthquakes and you know with California earthquakes and you know with California earthquakes and you know with the A9 quake and the area freeway the A9 quake and the area freeway the A9 quake and the area freeway pancake and the Bay Bridge actually pancake and the Bay Bridge actually pancake and the Bay Bridge actually a segment fell out. People forget this a segment fell out. People forget this a segment fell out. People forget this during the World Series during the World Series during the World Series &gt;&gt; that happened now there would be so many &gt;&gt; that happened now there would be so many &gt;&gt; that happened now there would be so many casualties but it was a lot less casualties but it was a lot less casualties but it was a lot less &gt;&gt; busy in the Bay Area back then. &gt;&gt; busy in the Bay Area back then. &gt;&gt; busy in the Bay Area back then. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The first thing that happens in an &gt;&gt; The first thing that happens in an &gt;&gt; The first thing that happens in an earthquake is it sounds like a train is earthquake is it sounds like a train is earthquake is it sounds like a train is about to come through the room. about to come through the room. about to come through the room. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sure. &gt;&gt; And then the shaking starts shortly &gt;&gt; And then the shaking starts shortly &gt;&gt; And then the shaking starts shortly thereafter. Uh-huh. thereafter. Uh-huh. thereafter. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; But the sound always comes first. &gt;&gt; But the sound always comes first. &gt;&gt; But the sound always comes first. &gt;&gt; I always tell people this when they're &gt;&gt; I always tell people this when they're &gt;&gt; I always tell people this when they're afraid of earthquakes. Like you'll hear afraid of earthquakes. Like you'll hear afraid of earthquakes. Like you'll hear it before you'll feel it before you see it before you'll feel it before you see it before you'll feel it before you see it. &gt;&gt; So if it sounds like a train is going to &gt;&gt; So if it sounds like a train is going to &gt;&gt; So if it sounds like a train is going to come through the room, come through the room, come through the room, &gt;&gt; you're probably about to have an &gt;&gt; you're probably about to have an &gt;&gt; you're probably about to have an earthquake, &gt;&gt; right? I think elephants use um sound to &gt;&gt; right? I think elephants use um sound to &gt;&gt; right? I think elephants use um sound to communicate over long distances. I So communicate over long distances. I So communicate over long distances. I So &gt;&gt; that's cool. They stomp. &gt;&gt; that's cool. They stomp. &gt;&gt; that's cool. They stomp. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. Or they can hear Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. Or they can hear Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. Or they can hear Yeah, they can hear things. I think they have they can hear things. I think they have they can hear things. I think they have sensors in their feet that can pick up sensors in their feet that can pick up sensors in their feet that can pick up these vibrations that we might call these vibrations that we might call these vibrations that we might call sound. &gt;&gt; Oh, that's cool. Yeah. That's like that &gt;&gt; Oh, that's cool. Yeah. That's like that &gt;&gt; Oh, that's cool. Yeah. That's like that scene in Stand by Me. Yeah. scene in Stand by Me. Yeah. scene in Stand by Me. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Where they're crossing the train tracks &gt;&gt; Where they're crossing the train tracks &gt;&gt; Where they're crossing the train tracks on a bridge. on a bridge. on a bridge. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And all the &gt;&gt; And all the &gt;&gt; And all the &gt;&gt; kids are just kind of moving along and &gt;&gt; kids are just kind of moving along and &gt;&gt; kids are just kind of moving along and then uh Gordy, who's the then uh Gordy, who's the then uh Gordy, who's the &gt;&gt; arguably one of the smarter in the &gt;&gt; arguably one of the smarter in the &gt;&gt; arguably one of the smarter in the bunch, he he's like bunch, he he's like bunch, he he's like &gt;&gt; he's reaching down and holding the &gt;&gt; he's reaching down and holding the &gt;&gt; he's reaching down and holding the tracks and he feels the track shakes tracks and he feels the track shakes tracks and he feels the track shakes before he before he before he &gt;&gt; hears the um the horn. And then &gt;&gt; hears the um the horn. And then &gt;&gt; hears the um the horn. And then of course the smoke rounds the corner, of course the smoke rounds the corner, of course the smoke rounds the corner, train rounds the corner. train rounds the corner. train rounds the corner. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. And with &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. And with &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. And with the elephants, I'm not sure. I think the elephants, I'm not sure. I think the elephants, I'm not sure. I think maybe it's not sensors in the feet, but maybe it's not sensors in the feet, but maybe it's not sensors in the feet, but bone conduction from the feet to the bone conduction from the feet to the bone conduction from the feet to the ear. &gt;&gt; Um, and that's where it's where it's &gt;&gt; Um, and that's where it's where it's &gt;&gt; Um, and that's where it's where it's being picked up. being picked up. being picked up. &gt;&gt; So, okay. So, your question was, if I &gt;&gt; So, okay. So, your question was, if I &gt;&gt; So, okay. So, your question was, if I can go back to your question, it was can go back to your question, it was can go back to your question, it was about distance and how do we know how about distance and how do we know how about distance and how do we know how far away a sound is coming from? So far away a sound is coming from? So far away a sound is coming from? So [snorts] the loudness cue requires [snorts] the loudness cue requires [snorts] the loudness cue requires you to know something about how loud the you to know something about how loud the you to know something about how loud the original stimulus at the source is. And original stimulus at the source is. And original stimulus at the source is. And so thunder is a wonderful example of so thunder is a wonderful example of so thunder is a wonderful example of this because we do have quite a bit of this because we do have quite a bit of this because we do have quite a bit of experience with thunder. So we can kind experience with thunder. So we can kind experience with thunder. So we can kind of use how loud it is as a good cue. And of use how loud it is as a good cue. And of use how loud it is as a good cue. And it also works great because we're it also works great because we're it also works great because we're talking about really long distances, talking about really long distances, talking about really long distances, right? There's another pretty cool cue right? There's another pretty cool cue right? There's another pretty cool cue that you and I are probably using right that you and I are probably using right that you and I are probably using right now, and that is that the sound in this now, and that is that the sound in this now, and that is that the sound in this room is bouncing off of all the room is bouncing off of all the room is bouncing off of all the different surfaces. So, the shortest different surfaces. So, the shortest different surfaces. So, the shortest path copy of the sound is coming path copy of the sound is coming path copy of the sound is coming straight from your mouth to my ears, but straight from your mouth to my ears, but straight from your mouth to my ears, but in addition, there's a copy that's in addition, there's a copy that's in addition, there's a copy that's bouncing off of the table that's between bouncing off of the table that's between bouncing off of the table that's between us. That will have a has a longer path us. That will have a has a longer path us. That will have a has a longer path length, so it'll be slightly delayed. length, so it'll be slightly delayed. length, so it'll be slightly delayed. There'll be another copy that's, you There'll be another copy that's, you There'll be another copy that's, you know, hitting the ceiling and coming know, hitting the ceiling and coming know, hitting the ceiling and coming down to my ears. Oh, this is weird. down to my ears. Oh, this is weird. down to my ears. Oh, this is weird. &gt;&gt; And that is going to have an even longer &gt;&gt; And that is going to have an even longer &gt;&gt; And that is going to have an even longer delay. I'm completely unaware of this, delay. I'm completely unaware of this, delay. I'm completely unaware of this, but my brain is probably using the but my brain is probably using the but my brain is probably using the slight differences and the kind of slight differences and the kind of slight differences and the kind of pattern of slight differences to figure pattern of slight differences to figure pattern of slight differences to figure out, you know, that you're about 7 ft out, you know, that you're about 7 ft out, you know, that you're about 7 ft away from me. If we were closer to away from me. If we were closer to away from me. If we were closer to each other, the difference between that each other, the difference between that each other, the difference between that straight path copy and the copy bouncing straight path copy and the copy bouncing straight path copy and the copy bouncing off of the table would be greater than off of the table would be greater than off of the table would be greater than it is right now. Because at this angle it is right now. Because at this angle it is right now. Because at this angle with this, you know, geometry, there's with this, you know, geometry, there's with this, you know, geometry, there's really not that much difference. So the really not that much difference. So the really not that much difference. So the bounced off copy and the straight path bounced off copy and the straight path bounced off copy and the straight path copy are pretty similar. copy are pretty similar. copy are pretty similar. &gt;&gt; I never thought about this. &gt;&gt; I never thought about this. &gt;&gt; I never thought about this. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. Right. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. Right. &gt;&gt; It's incredible. Right. &gt;&gt; This is a way that vision is so &gt;&gt; This is a way that vision is so &gt;&gt; This is a way that vision is so different. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I came up through vision science mostly. &gt;&gt; I came up through vision science mostly. &gt;&gt; I came up through vision science mostly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So did I. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So did I. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So did I. &gt;&gt; And Right. I mean, there are certain &gt;&gt; And Right. I mean, there are certain &gt;&gt; And Right. I mean, there are certain wavelengths of light that can pass wavelengths of light that can pass wavelengths of light that can pass through our body like long wavelength through our body like long wavelength through our body like long wavelength light. That's relatively new findings. I light. That's relatively new findings. I light. That's relatively new findings. I think it's really interesting and it's think it's really interesting and it's think it's really interesting and it's very healthy for us. turns out, you very healthy for us. turns out, you very healthy for us. turns out, you know, mitochondrial health, etc. But know, mitochondrial health, etc. But know, mitochondrial health, etc. But &gt;&gt; like in general, we're not used to &gt;&gt; like in general, we're not used to &gt;&gt; like in general, we're not used to thinking about light and wavelengths of thinking about light and wavelengths of thinking about light and wavelengths of light going through things unless light going through things unless light going through things unless they're translucent or transparent like they're translucent or transparent like they're translucent or transparent like a window. a window. a window. Sound is constantly bouncing off Sound is constantly bouncing off Sound is constantly bouncing off everything. &gt;&gt; We're in a hall of mirrors for sound all &gt;&gt; We're in a hall of mirrors for sound all &gt;&gt; We're in a hall of mirrors for sound all the time. the time. the time. &gt;&gt; But you experience me and I experience &gt;&gt; But you experience me and I experience &gt;&gt; But you experience me and I experience you during this conversation as one you during this conversation as one you during this conversation as one coherent sound. Even though we are coherent sound. Even though we are coherent sound. Even though we are biologically poised to detect half a biologically poised to detect half a biologically poised to detect half a millisecond differences in the arrival millisecond differences in the arrival millisecond differences in the arrival time of the two ears, they're much time of the two ears, they're much time of the two ears, they're much greater differences in the arrival time greater differences in the arrival time greater differences in the arrival time of my voice bouncing off the table of my voice bouncing off the table of my voice bouncing off the table versus the walls versus the ceiling versus the walls versus the ceiling versus the walls versus the ceiling versus direct path. But you integrate versus direct path. But you integrate versus direct path. But you integrate them &gt;&gt; and I don't hear you as saying the same &gt;&gt; and I don't hear you as saying the same &gt;&gt; and I don't hear you as saying the same thing, you know, five different times, thing, you know, five different times, thing, you know, five different times, right? You know, it's one integrated right? You know, it's one integrated right? You know, it's one integrated hole. &gt;&gt; And closing one's eyes doesn't change &gt;&gt; And closing one's eyes doesn't change &gt;&gt; And closing one's eyes doesn't change that. If I close my eyes and you speak, that. If I close my eyes and you speak, that. If I close my eyes and you speak, I can register to the direct path, I can register to the direct path, I can register to the direct path, &gt;&gt; I infer that you're right in front of &gt;&gt; I infer that you're right in front of &gt;&gt; I infer that you're right in front of me. Of course, I know that because my me. Of course, I know that because my me. Of course, I know that because my eyes were open a second ago, but all the eyes were open a second ago, but all the eyes were open a second ago, but all the versions of your voice arriving bouncing versions of your voice arriving bouncing versions of your voice arriving bouncing off the different surfaces are arriving off the different surfaces are arriving off the different surfaces are arriving at my ears and I don't it doesn't it's at my ears and I don't it doesn't it's at my ears and I don't it doesn't it's not confusing and it's not jarring, not confusing and it's not jarring, not confusing and it's not jarring, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Like if somebody came over and touched &gt;&gt; Like if somebody came over and touched &gt;&gt; Like if somebody came over and touched my arm and I felt it on my arm but also my arm and I felt it on my arm but also my arm and I felt it on my arm but also a little bit on the back of my neck and a little bit on the back of my neck and a little bit on the back of my neck and a little bit on my knee, that would be a little bit on my knee, that would be a little bit on my knee, that would be weird. That would that would be odd, you weird. That would that would be odd, you weird. That would that would be odd, you know, and we can get these sensations. know, and we can get these sensations. know, and we can get these sensations. There are certain places on the back, There are certain places on the back, There are certain places on the back, for instance, that you can feel a subtle for instance, that you can feel a subtle for instance, that you can feel a subtle kind of phantom touch in your foot kind of phantom touch in your foot kind of phantom touch in your foot because of the way the neural circuits because of the way the neural circuits because of the way the neural circuits are organized. And with pain, we talk are organized. And with pain, we talk are organized. And with pain, we talk about this as like referenced pain. You about this as like referenced pain. You about this as like referenced pain. You know, for internal organs, there's know, for internal organs, there's know, for internal organs, there's they're branches of uh of nerves such they're branches of uh of nerves such they're branches of uh of nerves such that, you know, uh and this shows up in that, you know, uh and this shows up in that, you know, uh and this shows up in you know, eastern medicine, but also you know, eastern medicine, but also you know, eastern medicine, but also western medicine. Like someone with a western medicine. Like someone with a western medicine. Like someone with a with like liver pain will register that with like liver pain will register that with like liver pain will register that in their shoulder, you know, and we in their shoulder, you know, and we in their shoulder, you know, and we think, oh, this is crazy. You know, it's think, oh, this is crazy. You know, it's think, oh, this is crazy. You know, it's not crazy that there's actually branches not crazy that there's actually branches not crazy that there's actually branches that support that referenced pain. that support that referenced pain. that support that referenced pain. &gt;&gt; But we don't do this with hearing. &gt;&gt; But we don't do this with hearing. &gt;&gt; But we don't do this with hearing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; We shut it all down and we just collect &gt;&gt; We shut it all down and we just collect &gt;&gt; We shut it all down and we just collect the we make we draw a conclusion, the we make we draw a conclusion, the we make we draw a conclusion, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; Wild. &gt;&gt; It's wild, isn't it? &gt;&gt; It's wild, isn't it? &gt;&gt; It's wild, isn't it? &gt;&gt; It's totally wild. Uh, are you about to &gt;&gt; It's totally wild. Uh, are you about to &gt;&gt; It's totally wild. Uh, are you about to tell me that our voices are also causing tell me that our voices are also causing tell me that our voices are also causing vibrations in the objects around us and vibrations in the objects around us and vibrations in the objects around us and that we just can't detect them? Why are that we just can't detect them? Why are that we just can't detect them? Why are we not like the elephants? How come we not like the elephants? How come we not like the elephants? How come we &gt;&gt; Maybe we are like the elephants. I don't &gt;&gt; Maybe we are like the elephants. I don't &gt;&gt; Maybe we are like the elephants. I don't know &gt;&gt; is it the case that low frequency sounds &gt;&gt; is it the case that low frequency sounds &gt;&gt; is it the case that low frequency sounds can travel further can travel further can travel further with respect to our ability to detect with respect to our ability to detect with respect to our ability to detect them. &gt;&gt; So I you know I don't want to get into a &gt;&gt; So I you know I don't want to get into a &gt;&gt; So I you know I don't want to get into a conversation about frequency of sound conversation about frequency of sound conversation about frequency of sound and intensity and high versus low and intensity and high versus low and intensity and high versus low frequency because that's really frequency because that's really frequency because that's really about the physics of sound. about the physics of sound. about the physics of sound. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; But ultimately we filter the physics of &gt;&gt; But ultimately we filter the physics of &gt;&gt; But ultimately we filter the physics of sound through our nervous system. So, sound through our nervous system. So, sound through our nervous system. So, if I want to signal to somebody far if I want to signal to somebody far if I want to signal to somebody far away, I would probably want like a big away, I would probably want like a big away, I would probably want like a big bass drum or a gong. I would not try to bass drum or a gong. I would not try to bass drum or a gong. I would not try to whistle to them far away. Or if I could whistle to them far away. Or if I could whistle to them far away. Or if I could pick a horn that was a deep like pick a horn that was a deep like pick a horn that was a deep like &gt;&gt; versus like &gt;&gt; versus like &gt;&gt; versus like I'd want bass. I'd want bass. I'd want bass. &gt;&gt; So, there's a few things wrapped up &gt;&gt; So, there's a few things wrapped up &gt;&gt; So, there's a few things wrapped up here. One is that the lower frequencies here. One is that the lower frequencies here. One is that the lower frequencies bend more bend more easily. So they bend more bend more easily. So they bend more bend more easily. So they can go around these objects better. So can go around these objects better. So can go around these objects better. So if you're talking really long distances, if you're talking really long distances, if you're talking really long distances, you know, the odds that there's you know, the odds that there's you know, the odds that there's something in the path that you want to something in the path that you want to something in the path that you want to &gt;&gt; the sound to go around or are go up. &gt;&gt; the sound to go around or are go up. &gt;&gt; the sound to go around or are go up. Uh, another thing that's wrapped up here Uh, another thing that's wrapped up here Uh, another thing that's wrapped up here is that we tend to lose high frequency is that we tend to lose high frequency is that we tend to lose high frequency hearing before we lose low frequency hearing before we lose low frequency hearing before we lose low frequency hearing. Mhm. hearing. Mhm. hearing. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] so the lower &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] so the lower &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] so the lower frequencies are audible to more people frequencies are audible to more people frequencies are audible to more people and are louder to people than the and are louder to people than the and are louder to people than the higher frequencies. higher frequencies. higher frequencies. &gt;&gt; So you're saying it's because it can &gt;&gt; So you're saying it's because it can &gt;&gt; So you're saying it's because it can bend around objects. bend around objects. bend around objects. &gt;&gt; Well, I don't really know what the &gt;&gt; Well, I don't really know what the &gt;&gt; Well, I don't really know what the choices that are being made are by the choices that are being made are by the choices that are being made are by the people whose job it is to figure these people whose job it is to figure these people whose job it is to figure these kinds of things out. But I'm sure that kinds of things out. But I'm sure that kinds of things out. But I'm sure that there's some thought being given to the there's some thought being given to the there's some thought being given to the receiver, you know, the people and receiver, you know, the people and receiver, you know, the people and what they can what they can perceive. what they can what they can perceive. what they can what they can perceive. So, let's take a couple other examples So, let's take a couple other examples So, let's take a couple other examples of warning systems that humans use. of warning systems that humans use. of warning systems that humans use. The gas in a gas stove doesn't have an The gas in a gas stove doesn't have an The gas in a gas stove doesn't have an intrinsic odor to it. intrinsic odor to it. intrinsic odor to it. &gt;&gt; There's an odorant that's been added. &gt;&gt; There's an odorant that's been added. &gt;&gt; There's an odorant that's been added. &gt;&gt; That rotten egg sulfur smell. &gt;&gt; That rotten egg sulfur smell. &gt;&gt; That rotten egg sulfur smell. &gt;&gt; That rotten egg. Yeah. Exactly. And so, &gt;&gt; That rotten egg. Yeah. Exactly. And so, &gt;&gt; That rotten egg. Yeah. Exactly. And so, you know, that was chosen a long time you know, that was chosen a long time you know, that was chosen a long time ago to be added. And, you know, it turns ago to be added. And, you know, it turns ago to be added. And, you know, it turns out to be a good thing because it out to be a good thing because it out to be a good thing because it doesn't really smell like doesn't really smell like doesn't really smell like anything else. It's not pleasant, but anything else. It's not pleasant, but anything else. It's not pleasant, but everybody can detect it. I don't know of everybody can detect it. I don't know of everybody can detect it. I don't know of any cases of people that can't smell any cases of people that can't smell any cases of people that can't smell that unless they have a generalized uh that unless they have a generalized uh that unless they have a generalized uh anosmia where they can't smell anything. anosmia where they can't smell anything. anosmia where they can't smell anything. Traffic lights are maybe a little bit of Traffic lights are maybe a little bit of Traffic lights are maybe a little bit of a less of a win because you got red a less of a win because you got red a less of a win because you got red versus green and 6% of the population is versus green and 6% of the population is versus green and 6% of the population is red green colorblind which operationally red green colorblind which operationally red green colorblind which operationally means not that you can't see a red means not that you can't see a red means not that you can't see a red stimulus or a green stimulus but that stimulus or a green stimulus but that stimulus or a green stimulus but that you can't tell the difference um you can't tell the difference um you can't tell the difference um you know whether or not something is red or know whether or not something is red or know whether or not something is red or green. Yeah, I should just say that um green. Yeah, I should just say that um green. Yeah, I should just say that um that most red green colorblind people that most red green colorblind people that most red green colorblind people tend to be males just because of where tend to be males just because of where tend to be males just because of where the gene mutation is in the gene mutation is in the gene mutation is in the &gt;&gt; in the genome and they don't see people &gt;&gt; in the genome and they don't see people &gt;&gt; in the genome and they don't see people always want to know like what does always want to know like what does always want to know like what does red look like to them. red look like to them. red look like to them. &gt;&gt; Red and green look kind of more &gt;&gt; Red and green look kind of more &gt;&gt; Red and green look kind of more orang-ish burnt brown orange color and orang-ish burnt brown orange color and orang-ish burnt brown orange color and dogs see the world that way all the dogs see the world that way all the dogs see the world that way all the time, &gt;&gt; right? So if you do a color matching &gt;&gt; right? So if you do a color matching &gt;&gt; right? So if you do a color matching experiment, I my understanding is experiment, I my understanding is experiment, I my understanding is something along the lines of people with something along the lines of people with something along the lines of people with red green color blindness will map both red green color blindness will map both red green color blindness will map both red and green onto yellow red and green onto yellow red and green onto yellow &gt;&gt; and not and not be able [clears throat] &gt;&gt; and not and not be able [clears throat] &gt;&gt; and not and not be able [clears throat] to tell the difference. It's not the to tell the difference. It's not the to tell the difference. It's not the kind of u cartoon view of like it looks kind of u cartoon view of like it looks kind of u cartoon view of like it looks black and white. black and white. black and white. &gt;&gt; There are people who are completely &gt;&gt; There are people who are completely &gt;&gt; There are people who are completely monochromatic, but it's very rare, monochromatic, but it's very rare, monochromatic, but it's very rare, &gt;&gt; very rare, &gt;&gt; very rare, &gt;&gt; very rare, &gt;&gt; very rare. And there are other &gt;&gt; very rare. And there are other &gt;&gt; very rare. And there are other forms of color blindness that are more forms of color blindness that are more forms of color blindness that are more subtle and color blindness people should subtle and color blindness people should subtle and color blindness people should we'll put a link to this Jay and Morin we'll put a link to this Jay and Morin we'll put a link to this Jay and Morin Knights up at the University of Knights up at the University of Knights up at the University of Washington. a terrific um they run a Washington. a terrific um they run a Washington. a terrific um they run a color vision lab. She's a molecular color vision lab. She's a molecular color vision lab. She's a molecular biologist. He's more of a biologist. He's more of a biologist. He's more of a psychophysicist &gt;&gt; and they have some really great color &gt;&gt; and they have some really great color &gt;&gt; and they have some really great color vision tests there that people can take vision tests there that people can take vision tests there that people can take &gt;&gt; and many people find that they have &gt;&gt; and many people find that they have &gt;&gt; and many people find that they have subtle color vision deficits. subtle color vision deficits. subtle color vision deficits. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; But but they don't consider themselves &gt;&gt; But but they don't consider themselves &gt;&gt; But but they don't consider themselves fully color blind. But every once in a fully color blind. But every once in a fully color blind. But every once in a while &gt;&gt; monochromats usually know that they're &gt;&gt; monochromats usually know that they're &gt;&gt; monochromats usually know that they're seeing the world. They're black and seeing the world. They're black and seeing the world. They're black and white. And a lot of what you know is white. And a lot of what you know is white. And a lot of what you know is under this heading is really more an under this heading is really more an under this heading is really more an anomaly than a complete absence of an anomaly than a complete absence of an anomaly than a complete absence of an ability to distinguish red from green. ability to distinguish red from green. ability to distinguish red from green. But back to our traffic lights. So you But back to our traffic lights. So you But back to our traffic lights. So you got your red versus green signaling got your red versus green signaling got your red versus green signaling something very different. And most something very different. And most something very different. And most places have those lights oriented places have those lights oriented places have those lights oriented vertically which gives you a second cue to what's which gives you a second cue to what's which gives you a second cue to what's what needs to be conveyed here. So what needs to be conveyed here. So what needs to be conveyed here. So &gt;&gt; not the same light switching, &gt;&gt; not the same light switching, &gt;&gt; not the same light switching, &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same light &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same light &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same light switching. um and one is on top and the switching. um and one is on top and the switching. um and one is on top and the other's on the bottom. It's more of a other's on the bottom. It's more of a other's on the bottom. It's more of a problem when uh in some intersections problem when uh in some intersections problem when uh in some intersections the set of three lights is the set of three lights is the set of three lights is oriented horizontally. oriented horizontally. oriented horizontally. &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. AGZ is, to my one easy to drink mix. AGZ is, to my one easy to drink mix. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 supplement on the market. I take it 30 supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's to 60 minutes before sleep. It's to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. If you'd like to try AGZ, better sleep. If you'd like to try AGZ, better sleep. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman go to drinkagz.com/huberman go to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Our place makes my favorite ourplace. Our place makes my favorite ourplace. Our place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these PASS or forever chemicals like Teflon PASS or forever chemicals like Teflon PASS or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of HourPlace. why I'm a huge fan of HourPlace. why I'm a huge fan of HourPlace. Hourplace products are made with the Hourplace products are made with the Hourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and are all highest quality materials and are all highest quality materials and are all PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero first non-stick pan made with zero first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no uses pure titanium. This means it has no uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not harmful forever chemicals and does not harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect degrade or lose its non-stick effect degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look over time. It's also beautiful to look over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design Pan Pro almost every morning. The design Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly allows for the eggs to cook perfectly allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook without sticking to the pan. I also cook without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it always burgers and steaks in it, and it always burgers and steaks in it, and it always puts a really nice sear on the meat. But puts a really nice sear on the meat. But puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's again, nothing sticks to it, so it's again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even really easy to clean, and it's even really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full constantly. Our place now has a full line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses the first of its kind titanium non-stick the first of its kind titanium non-stick the first of its kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code Huberman. Right now, and use the code Huberman. Right now, and use the code Huberman. Right now, our place is having their biggest sale our place is having their biggest sale our place is having their biggest sale of the year. You can get up to 35% off of the year. You can get up to 35% off of the year. You can get up to 35% off all products now through January 12th, all products now through January 12th, all products now through January 12th, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, 2026. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can free shipping, and free returns, you can free shipping, and free returns, you can try ourplace with zero risk. And you can try ourplace with zero risk. And you can try ourplace with zero risk. And you can see why more than 1 million people have see why more than 1 million people have see why more than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchenware. made the switch to ourplace kitchenware. made the switch to ourplace kitchenware. Again, that's from ourplace.com/huberman Again, that's from ourplace.com/huberman Again, that's from ourplace.com/huberman to get up to 35% off. So really what to get up to 35% off. So really what to get up to 35% off. So really what we're talking about that I'd like to we're talking about that I'd like to we're talking about that I'd like to drill into even deeper across senses but drill into even deeper across senses but drill into even deeper across senses but primarily with sound is you know how primarily with sound is you know how primarily with sound is you know how space how the physical environment space how the physical environment space how the physical environment shapes our perception of things. shapes our perception of things. shapes our perception of things. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, and I'm also very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, and I'm also very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, and I'm also very interested in the vi the relationship interested in the vi the relationship interested in the vi the relationship between vibration and sound given that between vibration and sound given that between vibration and sound given that our ears contain the apparatus to detect our ears contain the apparatus to detect our ears contain the apparatus to detect sound frequency but also uh have to do sound frequency but also uh have to do sound frequency but also uh have to do with you know balance and vibration. with you know balance and vibration. with you know balance and vibration. &gt;&gt; Most of us have had the experience of &gt;&gt; Most of us have had the experience of &gt;&gt; Most of us have had the experience of someone pulling up next to us in a car someone pulling up next to us in a car someone pulling up next to us in a car blasting bass really loud and our blasting bass really loud and our blasting bass really loud and our windows start shaking and their windows start shaking and their windows start shaking and their windows start shaking. Can we talk just about start shaking. Can we talk just about start shaking. Can we talk just about how objects have a resonant frequency? how objects have a resonant frequency? how objects have a resonant frequency? Right. &gt;&gt; I think this is pretty interesting. And &gt;&gt; I think this is pretty interesting. And &gt;&gt; I think this is pretty interesting. And then people will inevitably want to know then people will inevitably want to know then people will inevitably want to know about how humans have a resonant about how humans have a resonant about how humans have a resonant frequency. And we do. I believe that frequency. And we do. I believe that frequency. And we do. I believe that certain frequencies of sound can shape certain frequencies of sound can shape certain frequencies of sound can shape our emotional state. our emotional state. our emotional state. &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I mean, that's music, right? &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I mean, that's music, right? &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I mean, that's music, right? &gt;&gt; For example, it just for some reason &gt;&gt; For example, it just for some reason &gt;&gt; For example, it just for some reason when we break it down to one frequency when we break it down to one frequency when we break it down to one frequency and it's not um packaged in music, and it's not um packaged in music, and it's not um packaged in music, &gt;&gt; people somehow think it's like woo or &gt;&gt; people somehow think it's like woo or &gt;&gt; people somehow think it's like woo or mysticism and it's not. I mean the mysticism and it's not. I mean the mysticism and it's not. I mean the I'm fascinated by this like the g like I'm fascinated by this like the g like I'm fascinated by this like the g like gongs as an ancient tool for trying to gongs as an ancient tool for trying to gongs as an ancient tool for trying to orient people's emotional state orient people's emotional state orient people's emotional state &gt;&gt; or signal like if we hear boom &gt;&gt; or signal like if we hear boom &gt;&gt; or signal like if we hear boom [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] &gt;&gt; it sounds ominous &gt;&gt; it sounds ominous &gt;&gt; it sounds ominous right if we hear chirping of birds right if we hear chirping of birds right if we hear chirping of birds &gt;&gt; we know they're birds but if we hear &gt;&gt; we know they're birds but if we hear &gt;&gt; we know they're birds but if we hear light um you know in the Disney movies light um you know in the Disney movies light um you know in the Disney movies that you know it's been a long time that you know it's been a long time that you know it's been a long time since I've seen a Disney movie but the since I've seen a Disney movie but the since I've seen a Disney movie but the kind of the kind of the kind of the stuff of fluttering is high frequency stuff of fluttering is high frequency stuff of fluttering is high frequency high frequency movement tends to be high frequency movement tends to be high frequency movement tends to be high frequency sound. frequency sound. frequency sound. So, how do you think about the relationship how do you think about the relationship how do you think about the relationship between frequency and emotion and between frequency and emotion and between frequency and emotion and resonant frequency? I mean, it's a vast resonant frequency? I mean, it's a vast resonant frequency? I mean, it's a vast landscape, but I'd love your thoughts on landscape, but I'd love your thoughts on landscape, but I'd love your thoughts on this. &gt;&gt; So, can we can we go into the music &gt;&gt; So, can we can we go into the music &gt;&gt; So, can we can we go into the music realm to talk about this, realm to talk about this, realm to talk about this, &gt;&gt; please? I think that's intuitive for &gt;&gt; please? I think that's intuitive for &gt;&gt; please? I think that's intuitive for many people. many people. many people. &gt;&gt; Okay, good. So, one of the things that I &gt;&gt; Okay, good. So, one of the things that I &gt;&gt; Okay, good. So, one of the things that I think is fascinating about music is that think is fascinating about music is that think is fascinating about music is that it's universal and nobody really knows it's universal and nobody really knows it's universal and nobody really knows what it's for. Like it's pretty clear what it's for. Like it's pretty clear what it's for. Like it's pretty clear that language is useful to us, right? that language is useful to us, right? that language is useful to us, right? It, you know, helps us exchange It, you know, helps us exchange It, you know, helps us exchange information. &gt;&gt; So pretty obvious that language is a &gt;&gt; So pretty obvious that language is a &gt;&gt; So pretty obvious that language is a benefit, a survival benefit for benefit, a survival benefit for benefit, a survival benefit for individuals and for the species as a individuals and for the species as a individuals and for the species as a whole. We don't really have as clear a view of We don't really have as clear a view of We don't really have as clear a view of why music, you know, what role did music why music, you know, what role did music why music, you know, what role did music play in our um success play in our um success play in our um success uh in evolution, natural selection. uh in evolution, natural selection. uh in evolution, natural selection. &gt;&gt; You know, music is it really is &gt;&gt; You know, music is it really is &gt;&gt; You know, music is it really is universal. Um every human culture has universal. Um every human culture has universal. Um every human culture has it. Um there is some variation as to it. Um there is some variation as to it. Um there is some variation as to whether or not um a culture embraces whether or not um a culture embraces whether or not um a culture embraces melody, embraces harmony, but every melody, embraces harmony, but every melody, embraces harmony, but every culture has rhythm. You can't have culture has rhythm. You can't have culture has rhythm. You can't have melody or harmony without rhythm. It melody or harmony without rhythm. It melody or harmony without rhythm. It doesn't make any sense, right? Like doesn't make any sense, right? Like doesn't make any sense, right? Like imagine a familiar tune like imagine a familiar tune like imagine a familiar tune like Happy Birthday, but the duration of the Happy Birthday, but the duration of the Happy Birthday, but the duration of the notes was completely arbitrary. notes was completely arbitrary. notes was completely arbitrary. &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. It would not be &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. It would not be &gt;&gt; It would sound crazy. It would not be recognizable to us as happy birthday, recognizable to us as happy birthday, recognizable to us as happy birthday, but you can um you can play it fast, you but you can um you can play it fast, you but you can um you can play it fast, you can play it slow, you can play it, you can play it slow, you can play it, you can play it slow, you can play it, you know, pitch shifted up or pitch shifted know, pitch shifted up or pitch shifted know, pitch shifted up or pitch shifted down, musical terms in a different key, down, musical terms in a different key, down, musical terms in a different key, and we would recognize that as like a and we would recognize that as like a and we would recognize that as like a particular, you know, song. Um, so particular, you know, song. Um, so particular, you know, song. Um, so that's what I mean about rhythm being uh that's what I mean about rhythm being uh that's what I mean about rhythm being uh really critical. really critical. really critical. Um, and the criticality of rhythm offers Um, and the criticality of rhythm offers Um, and the criticality of rhythm offers up the following kind of wild uh theory. up the following kind of wild uh theory. up the following kind of wild uh theory. This is not my theory. Um, I wish I This is not my theory. Um, I wish I This is not my theory. Um, I wish I could quote whoseever theory it is, but could quote whoseever theory it is, but could quote whoseever theory it is, but it is that perhaps what rhythm, what it is that perhaps what rhythm, what it is that perhaps what rhythm, what music and rhythm is for, is to help us music and rhythm is for, is to help us music and rhythm is for, is to help us act in concert with one another act in concert with one another act in concert with one another and be louder than any of us could be by and be louder than any of us could be by and be louder than any of us could be by ourselves. um and to scare off predators and um and to scare off predators and um and to scare off predators and competitors. So, for example, imagine a competitors. So, for example, imagine a competitors. So, for example, imagine a pack of hyenas are surrounding a kill pack of hyenas are surrounding a kill pack of hyenas are surrounding a kill from, you know, a lion. The lion is from, you know, a lion. The lion is from, you know, a lion. The lion is long since sated and has gone away, but long since sated and has gone away, but long since sated and has gone away, but now a bunch of scrawny humans want to now a bunch of scrawny humans want to now a bunch of scrawny humans want to scare off uh the hyenas. If they go scare off uh the hyenas. If they go scare off uh the hyenas. If they go after the hyenas all stomping their feet after the hyenas all stomping their feet after the hyenas all stomping their feet together and shouting together, it's together and shouting together, it's together and shouting together, it's going to be a lot louder than any one going to be a lot louder than any one going to be a lot louder than any one person could do by themselves. person could do by themselves. person could do by themselves. &gt;&gt; Well, I like this theory. &gt;&gt; Well, I like this theory. &gt;&gt; Well, I like this theory. &gt;&gt; It's kind of nice, right? &gt;&gt; It's kind of nice, right? &gt;&gt; It's kind of nice, right? &gt;&gt; I'll tell you why in a moment, but &gt;&gt; I'll tell you why in a moment, but &gt;&gt; I'll tell you why in a moment, but please continue. And then that kind of please continue. And then that kind of please continue. And then that kind of concerted working together as a group. concerted working together as a group. concerted working together as a group. And you could sort of see that like once And you could sort of see that like once And you could sort of see that like once you had the basics of like and here you had the basics of like and here you had the basics of like and here I'm talking when I say once you have I'm talking when I say once you have I'm talking when I say once you have I'm really imagining on an evolutionary really imagining on an evolutionary really imagining on an evolutionary scale that any for anything to come scale that any for anything to come scale that any for anything to come about and endure requires that it about and endure requires that it about and endure requires that it increase our fitness at every stage of increase our fitness at every stage of increase our fitness at every stage of the way. So, initially you might get the way. So, initially you might get the way. So, initially you might get that rhythm thing going on. Um, but then that rhythm thing going on. Um, but then that rhythm thing going on. Um, but then that would be satisfying to people like that would be satisfying to people like that would be satisfying to people like if you had a mutation that made acting if you had a mutation that made acting if you had a mutation that made acting together feel good for some reason. And together feel good for some reason. And together feel good for some reason. And then it would come along with this then it would come along with this then it would come along with this benefit of competing with the hyenas benefit of competing with the hyenas benefit of competing with the hyenas for the lion kill. And then it would for the lion kill. And then it would for the lion kill. And then it would kind of potentially feed on itself of kind of potentially feed on itself of kind of potentially feed on itself of like, well, even more cooperative like, well, even more cooperative like, well, even more cooperative action, feeling good together action, feeling good together action, feeling good together allows us to then do other things allows us to then do other things allows us to then do other things together that we can't do individually. together that we can't do individually. together that we can't do individually. &gt;&gt; Have you ever seen the &gt;&gt; Have you ever seen the &gt;&gt; Have you ever seen the uh it's a song and a um I don't uh it's a song and a um I don't uh it's a song and a um I don't exactly know what to call it. Uh the exactly know what to call it. Uh the exactly know what to call it. Uh the chanting and the song of Mauy in New chanting and the song of Mauy in New chanting and the song of Mauy in New Zealand. Yeah, Zealand. Yeah, Zealand. Yeah, &gt;&gt; they'll do this before rugby games, &gt;&gt; they'll do this before rugby games, &gt;&gt; they'll do this before rugby games, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Because the All Blacks are one of the &gt;&gt; Because the All Blacks are one of the &gt;&gt; Because the All Blacks are one of the best rugby teams in the world. There's best rugby teams in the world. There's best rugby teams in the world. There's an incredible video um that a friend of an incredible video um that a friend of an incredible video um that a friend of mine, she always sends this to me when mine, she always sends this to me when mine, she always sends this to me when um &gt;&gt; uh when I'll say something like, you &gt;&gt; uh when I'll say something like, you &gt;&gt; uh when I'll say something like, you know, what do you think of something know, what do you think of something know, what do you think of something that was on the news or something and that was on the news or something and that was on the news or something and she'll and she'll send there's a she'll and she'll send there's a she'll and she'll send there's a incredible case of in the government in incredible case of in the government in incredible case of in the government in New Zealand. I think it's a I don't know New Zealand. I think it's a I don't know New Zealand. I think it's a I don't know if they use parliament or what or what if they use parliament or what or what if they use parliament or what or what there's an example of um okay I'll just there's an example of um okay I'll just there's an example of um okay I'll just say how it is there some white say how it is there some white say how it is there some white politician reads out some you know politician reads out some you know politician reads out some you know proclamation maybe like that's up for a proclamation maybe like that's up for a proclamation maybe like that's up for a vote and then all of a sudden it will vote and then all of a sudden it will vote and then all of a sudden it will start in one corner of this uh very start in one corner of this uh very start in one corner of this uh very majestic like government building majestic like government building majestic like government building &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; looks sort of like our congress but it's &gt;&gt; looks sort of like our congress but it's &gt;&gt; looks sort of like our congress but it's different and she'll start chanting it's different and she'll start chanting it's different and she'll start chanting and then and it's like wide eyes there's and then and it's like wide eyes there's and then and it's like wide eyes there's no blinking it's very interesting and no blinking it's very interesting and no blinking it's very interesting and they're stomping and is clapping and they're stomping and is clapping and they're stomping and is clapping and then all of a sudden it starts other then all of a sudden it starts other then all of a sudden it starts other people start joining in with her, people start joining in with her, people start joining in with her, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And and it gets really loud when they're &gt;&gt; And and it gets really loud when they're &gt;&gt; And and it gets really loud when they're together. &gt;&gt; A you know, you know a number of things &gt;&gt; A you know, you know a number of things &gt;&gt; A you know, you know a number of things immediately. A they're pissed. immediately. A they're pissed. immediately. A they're pissed. &gt;&gt; Two, they're not going to stand for &gt;&gt; Two, they're not going to stand for &gt;&gt; Two, they're not going to stand for this. Three, they're a lot of them. And this. Three, they're a lot of them. And this. Three, they're a lot of them. And four, like they're not to be messed four, like they're not to be messed four, like they're not to be messed with. &gt;&gt; They're united. &gt;&gt; They're united. &gt;&gt; They're united. &gt;&gt; They're united. Yeah. &gt;&gt; They're united. Yeah. &gt;&gt; They're united. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Admittedly, I had to have someone look &gt;&gt; Admittedly, I had to have someone look &gt;&gt; Admittedly, I had to have someone look this up. It's called Hakka. Uh, and it's this up. It's called Hakka. Uh, and it's this up. It's called Hakka. Uh, and it's incredible because you immediately incredible because you immediately incredible because you immediately understand how these people feel and understand how these people feel and understand how these people feel and it's a no, we're not going to take that it's a no, we're not going to take that it's a no, we're not going to take that kind of stance. At least in the context kind of stance. At least in the context kind of stance. At least in the context of this government example. of this government example. of this government example. &gt;&gt; In terms of pre- rugby match, it's &gt;&gt; In terms of pre- rugby match, it's &gt;&gt; In terms of pre- rugby match, it's really a display of vigor. Uh, and we really a display of vigor. Uh, and we really a display of vigor. Uh, and we are primates after all. All we are old are primates after all. All we are old are primates after all. All we are old world primates. Um, and vigor displays world primates. Um, and vigor displays world primates. Um, and vigor displays uh run through all the old world primate uh run through all the old world primate uh run through all the old world primate species, including us. species, including us. species, including us. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, and &gt;&gt; Um, and &gt;&gt; Um, and &gt;&gt; I think it's definitely a vigor display, &gt;&gt; I think it's definitely a vigor display, &gt;&gt; I think it's definitely a vigor display, &gt;&gt; like stomping, making one's big and the &gt;&gt; like stomping, making one's big and the &gt;&gt; like stomping, making one's big and the lack of blinking is something that, you lack of blinking is something that, you lack of blinking is something that, you know, as a vision scientist, I caught on know, as a vision scientist, I caught on know, as a vision scientist, I caught on to ear like no one's doing this and to ear like no one's doing this and to ear like no one's doing this and blinking a lot. They're they're showing blinking a lot. They're they're showing blinking a lot. They're they're showing that they will not break their attention that they will not break their attention that they will not break their attention &gt;&gt; until this is complete. And somebody not &gt;&gt; until this is complete. And somebody not &gt;&gt; until this is complete. And somebody not blinking while staring directly at you blinking while staring directly at you blinking while staring directly at you is a command for your attention. as is a command for your attention. as is a command for your attention. as well. &gt;&gt; And it's even in our language, isn't it? &gt;&gt; And it's even in our language, isn't it? &gt;&gt; And it's even in our language, isn't it? So and so didn't blink. So and so didn't blink. So and so didn't blink. &gt;&gt; That's right. They don't blink. They're &gt;&gt; That's right. They don't blink. They're &gt;&gt; That's right. They don't blink. They're not afraid. They're, you know, these not afraid. They're, you know, these not afraid. They're, you know, these days because of the days because of the days because of the craziness of the political socio craziness of the political socio craziness of the political socio landscape with assassinations and very landscape with assassinations and very landscape with assassinations and very strong personalities and government and strong personalities and government and strong personalities and government and online and because I'm, you know, in online and because I'm, you know, in online and because I'm, you know, in media now to at least some extent, media now to at least some extent, media now to at least some extent, different form of media, not politics. different form of media, not politics. different form of media, not politics. But, you know, I'm so um intrigued by But, you know, I'm so um intrigued by But, you know, I'm so um intrigued by the idea that some people are capturing the idea that some people are capturing the idea that some people are capturing people's attention and loyalty, not just people's attention and loyalty, not just people's attention and loyalty, not just by virtue of what they say, but the by virtue of what they say, but the by virtue of what they say, but the certainty with which they say it. Now, certainty with which they say it. Now, certainty with which they say it. Now, that's not a new theme, but also the that's not a new theme, but also the that's not a new theme, but also the tamber of their voice. Yeah. tamber of their voice. Yeah. tamber of their voice. Yeah. &gt;&gt; The refusal &gt;&gt; The refusal &gt;&gt; The refusal &gt;&gt; to entertain dissenting voices, but also &gt;&gt; to entertain dissenting voices, but also &gt;&gt; to entertain dissenting voices, but also how a lot of voices are just how a lot of voices are just how a lot of voices are just &gt;&gt; not the right tamber and frequency and &gt;&gt; not the right tamber and frequency and &gt;&gt; not the right tamber and frequency and delivered in the way that these people delivered in the way that these people delivered in the way that these people have obviously mastered their ability to have obviously mastered their ability to have obviously mastered their ability to command other people's attention. Like, command other people's attention. Like, command other people's attention. Like, it's a because this stuff hits at a it's a because this stuff hits at a it's a because this stuff hits at a primitive level, primitive level, primitive level, &gt;&gt; right? People aren't necessarily just &gt;&gt; right? People aren't necessarily just &gt;&gt; right? People aren't necessarily just voting on issues. They're voting on voting on issues. They're voting on voting on issues. They're voting on feeling. we've known this, right? feeling. we've known this, right? feeling. we've known this, right? &gt;&gt; So, in any case, the haka is a is a &gt;&gt; So, in any case, the haka is a is a &gt;&gt; So, in any case, the haka is a is a beautiful example of what you're beautiful example of what you're beautiful example of what you're describing. &gt;&gt; Well, and the other thing is that music &gt;&gt; Well, and the other thing is that music &gt;&gt; Well, and the other thing is that music plays a role in plays a role in plays a role in um in say the military and in war. I um in say the military and in war. I um in say the military and in war. I read somewhere that the military is the read somewhere that the military is the read somewhere that the military is the largest employer of musicians in this largest employer of musicians in this largest employer of musicians in this country. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. &gt;&gt; Well, you know, I thought it was a &gt;&gt; Well, you know, I thought it was a &gt;&gt; Well, you know, I thought it was a surprise to me when I first heard surprise to me when I first heard surprise to me when I first heard it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Surprising to me, but it makes &gt;&gt; Yeah. Surprising to me, but it makes &gt;&gt; Yeah. Surprising to me, but it makes I mean, somebody's got to play taps I mean, somebody's got to play taps I mean, somebody's got to play taps usually. That's one that's one horn. usually. That's one that's one horn. usually. That's one that's one horn. &gt;&gt; You get one, right? So, and I think the &gt;&gt; You get one, right? So, and I think the &gt;&gt; You get one, right? So, and I think the other, you know, possible angle for all other, you know, possible angle for all other, you know, possible angle for all of this is, you know, there are things of this is, you know, there are things of this is, you know, there are things in many species that are not obviously in many species that are not obviously in many species that are not obviously beneficial. Take the peacock for beneficial. Take the peacock for beneficial. Take the peacock for example. That that enormous investment example. That that enormous investment example. That that enormous investment in plumage in very colorful tail in plumage in very colorful tail in plumage in very colorful tail feathers is not something that is feathers is not something that is feathers is not something that is directly adding to the survival skills directly adding to the survival skills directly adding to the survival skills of the male peacock, but rather it's of the male peacock, but rather it's of the male peacock, but rather it's something the female peacocks like. Um, something the female peacocks like. Um, something the female peacocks like. Um, and so that tends to feed on itself too. and so that tends to feed on itself too. and so that tends to feed on itself too. So that's another way that music could So that's another way that music could So that's another way that music could get into our, you know, paniply of human get into our, you know, paniply of human get into our, you know, paniply of human characteristics without necessarily characteristics without necessarily characteristics without necessarily directly leading to something like being directly leading to something like being directly leading to something like being able to get more food. Like the rhythm able to get more food. Like the rhythm able to get more food. Like the rhythm thing gives us more food. thing gives us more food. thing gives us more food. &gt;&gt; People who are good at music might end &gt;&gt; People who are good at music might end &gt;&gt; People who are good at music might end up um with more offspring than people up um with more offspring than people up um with more offspring than people who um weren't good at music. That would who um weren't good at music. That would who um weren't good at music. That would be that would be the sort of uh general be that would be the sort of uh general be that would be the sort of uh general idea behind that part of the idea behind that part of the idea behind that part of the theory. &gt;&gt; In many now older movies um typically it &gt;&gt; In many now older movies um typically it &gt;&gt; In many now older movies um typically it was a man singing to a woman or in the was a man singing to a woman or in the was a man singing to a woman or in the movie Say anything. movie Say anything. movie Say anything. &gt;&gt; John Cusack simply used a boom box, &gt;&gt; John Cusack simply used a boom box, &gt;&gt; John Cusack simply used a boom box, right? um uh or um poetry, right? um uh or um poetry, right? um uh or um poetry, &gt;&gt; creative works, but expressed out loud &gt;&gt; creative works, but expressed out loud &gt;&gt; creative works, but expressed out loud &gt;&gt; were the way that um courtship &gt;&gt; were the way that um courtship &gt;&gt; were the way that um courtship took place. took place. took place. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Eric Jarvis was on this podcast. I don't &gt;&gt; Eric Jarvis was on this podcast. I don't &gt;&gt; Eric Jarvis was on this podcast. I don't know if you know Eric at the Rockefeller know if you know Eric at the Rockefeller know if you know Eric at the Rockefeller and he's a very um and he's a very um and he's a very um &gt;&gt; accomplished dancer. I don't know if you &gt;&gt; accomplished dancer. I don't know if you &gt;&gt; accomplished dancer. I don't know if you know this, but he was supposed to be in know this, but he was supposed to be in know this, but he was supposed to be in the Alvin Dance Company. He decided to the Alvin Dance Company. He decided to the Alvin Dance Company. He decided to become a neuroscientist instead, but as become a neuroscientist instead, but as become a neuroscientist instead, but as I understand, he's still a good dancer. I understand, he's still a good dancer. I understand, he's still a good dancer. Um and he was saying that he thought Um and he was saying that he thought Um and he was saying that he thought that perhaps primitive vocalizations that perhaps primitive vocalizations that perhaps primitive vocalizations evolved first. So vocalizations of evolved first. So vocalizations of evolved first. So vocalizations of disgust or pleasure or fear or disgust or pleasure or fear or disgust or pleasure or fear or excitement. &gt;&gt; Then he thought perhaps came song and &gt;&gt; Then he thought perhaps came song and &gt;&gt; Then he thought perhaps came song and dance. So song and body movement to dance. So song and body movement to dance. So song and body movement to signal what one was feeling or what signal what one was feeling or what signal what one was feeling or what their intention was. their intention was. their intention was. &gt;&gt; And then perhaps spoken language came &gt;&gt; And then perhaps spoken language came &gt;&gt; And then perhaps spoken language came after that. after that. after that. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. I just think we don't know. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. I just think we don't know. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. I just think we don't know. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we don't know. And I think it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, we don't know. And I think it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, we don't know. And I think it's kind of interesting there are maybe sort kind of interesting there are maybe sort kind of interesting there are maybe sort of two um like I think with the song of two um like I think with the song of two um like I think with the song bird they are signaling things like bird they are signaling things like bird they are signaling things like vigor and fitness and territoriality vigor and fitness and territoriality vigor and fitness and territoriality um and things like that they're not um and things like that they're not um and things like that they're not conveying something symbolic whereas the conveying something symbolic whereas the conveying something symbolic whereas the you know vocalizations in the primate you know vocalizations in the primate you know vocalizations in the primate tend to mean something specific. You tend to mean something specific. You tend to mean something specific. You know, sometimes I wish I, you know, sometimes I wish I, you know, sometimes I wish I, you know, could have a time machine and I could go could have a time machine and I could go could have a time machine and I could go back and, you know, look at what back and, you know, look at what back and, you know, look at what happened &gt;&gt; in earlier stages of evolution and &gt;&gt; in earlier stages of evolution and &gt;&gt; in earlier stages of evolution and just kind of see, well, what is the just kind of see, well, what is the just kind of see, well, what is the lineage that what is the sequence of lineage that what is the sequence of lineage that what is the sequence of events that led us to have language events that led us to have language events that led us to have language that led us to have music? Did it come that led us to have music? Did it come that led us to have music? Did it come from the same process as birds, you from the same process as birds, you from the same process as birds, you know, song birds or did it come from a know, song birds or did it come from a know, song birds or did it come from a completely parallel process? I mean I completely parallel process? I mean I completely parallel process? I mean I think we do see that think we do see that think we do see that evolution can arrive at similar evolution can arrive at similar evolution can arrive at similar characteristics through different means characteristics through different means characteristics through different means in different places in different times. in different places in different times. in different places in different times. So you know could be you know kind of So you know could be you know kind of So you know could be you know kind of convergent parallel process or it could convergent parallel process or it could convergent parallel process or it could be something different. be something different. be something different. &gt;&gt; I feel like music um conveys intention. &gt;&gt; I feel like music um conveys intention. &gt;&gt; I feel like music um conveys intention. Music can tell a story and music because Music can tell a story and music because Music can tell a story and music because of the way that it organizes language of the way that it organizes language of the way that it organizes language provided there's lyrics um into like provided there's lyrics um into like provided there's lyrics um into like riffs and motifs and melodies and riffs and motifs and melodies and riffs and motifs and melodies and choruses that choruses that choruses that &gt;&gt; it makes it very easy to remember &gt;&gt; it makes it very easy to remember &gt;&gt; it makes it very easy to remember things. I'd like to talk a little bit things. I'd like to talk a little bit things. I'd like to talk a little bit about the possible neural underpinnings about the possible neural underpinnings about the possible neural underpinnings of this. Uh two things come to mind. of this. Uh two things come to mind. of this. Uh two things come to mind. First of all, you mentioned uh the ABCs, First of all, you mentioned uh the ABCs, First of all, you mentioned uh the ABCs, &gt;&gt; you know, ABC D. Almost everybody &gt;&gt; you know, ABC D. Almost everybody &gt;&gt; you know, ABC D. Almost everybody knows that um that melody and it's knows that um that melody and it's knows that um that melody and it's probably easier to remember all those probably easier to remember all those probably easier to remember all those letters in that form as opposed to A B CDE E F G in that form as opposed to A B CDE E F G in that form as opposed to A B CDE E F G H I Sure, you know, because you break it H I Sure, you know, because you break it H I Sure, you know, because you break it up and I I'm almost certain this up and I I'm almost certain this up and I I'm almost certain this is true because I have a good friend and is true because I have a good friend and is true because I have a good friend and he's a very accomplished musician and he's a very accomplished musician and he's a very accomplished musician and he's an incredible he's an incredible he's an incredible &gt;&gt; songwriter and lyricist. He's written &gt;&gt; songwriter and lyricist. He's written &gt;&gt; songwriter and lyricist. He's written lyrics for a number of other artists, lyrics for a number of other artists, lyrics for a number of other artists, not just himself. And he has like not just himself. And he has like not just himself. And he has like several bands. He writes a song a day. several bands. He writes a song a day. several bands. He writes a song a day. &gt;&gt; It's crazy. He writes a He released a &gt;&gt; It's crazy. He writes a He released a &gt;&gt; It's crazy. He writes a He released a song a day during the pandemic. song a day during the pandemic. song a day during the pandemic. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; Great songs. And occasionally, because &gt;&gt; Great songs. And occasionally, because &gt;&gt; Great songs. And occasionally, because I'm such a fan of his music, I'll say, I'm such a fan of his music, I'll say, I'm such a fan of his music, I'll say, &gt;&gt; "There's that one song like what's that? &gt;&gt; "There's that one song like what's that? &gt;&gt; "There's that one song like what's that? What's the lyric?" You know, and What's the lyric?" You know, and What's the lyric?" You know, and he'll say, "Oh, yeah. No, I don't he'll say, "Oh, yeah. No, I don't he'll say, "Oh, yeah. No, I don't remember." He go and then he'll start remember." He go and then he'll start remember." He go and then he'll start and then he'll remember it. And I He's and then he'll remember it. And I He's and then he'll remember it. And I He's got thousands of songs in his in his got thousands of songs in his in his got thousands of songs in his in his library of songs he's written and sings. library of songs he's written and sings. library of songs he's written and sings. I said, "So, when you're on stage, how I said, "So, when you're on stage, how I said, "So, when you're on stage, how does it work?" You said, "As long as I does it work?" You said, "As long as I does it work?" You said, "As long as I can remember the first two words or can remember the first two words or can remember the first two words or three words, three words, three words, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; uh of a verse, the rest just kind of &gt;&gt; uh of a verse, the rest just kind of &gt;&gt; uh of a verse, the rest just kind of spills out of me." [clears throat] spills out of me." [clears throat] spills out of me." [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I think that's how song organizes &gt;&gt; I think that's how song organizes &gt;&gt; I think that's how song organizes language. &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very hard to memorize &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very hard to memorize &gt;&gt; Uh because it's very hard to memorize like a speech, but you can memorize a like a speech, but you can memorize a like a speech, but you can memorize a song, no problem. song, no problem. song, no problem. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And that's my experience, too, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And that's my experience, too, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And that's my experience, too, that if I know the first that if I know the first that if I know the first couple of words of a verse, I've got the couple of words of a verse, I've got the couple of words of a verse, I've got the rest of the verse. rest of the verse. rest of the verse. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It It's so interesting. So in the &gt;&gt; Yeah. It It's so interesting. So in the &gt;&gt; Yeah. It It's so interesting. So in the brain, &gt;&gt; uh we haven't talked too much about &gt;&gt; uh we haven't talked too much about &gt;&gt; uh we haven't talked too much about brain structures yet, but maybe we do brain structures yet, but maybe we do brain structures yet, but maybe we do that. Um and not to fill people's minds that. Um and not to fill people's minds that. Um and not to fill people's minds with names of things because I always with names of things because I always with names of things because I always say like it doesn't matter if it's say like it doesn't matter if it's say like it doesn't matter if it's called the superior caliculus or the called the superior caliculus or the called the superior caliculus or the superiorulus. It doesn't matter unless superiorulus. It doesn't matter unless superiorulus. It doesn't matter unless but what's interesting are the but what's interesting are the but what's interesting are the properties of these different brain properties of these different brain properties of these different brain structures. So I think about the ears as structures. So I think about the ears as structures. So I think about the ears as you know separating different you know separating different you know separating different frequencies of sound and then there's a frequencies of sound and then there's a frequencies of sound and then there's a bunch of other important stuff. No bunch of other important stuff. No bunch of other important stuff. No disrespect to the auditory disrespect to the auditory disrespect to the auditory neuroscientist but as you said in neuroscientist but as you said in neuroscientist but as you said in the superior caliculus is where hearing the superior caliculus is where hearing the superior caliculus is where hearing and vision and the other senses come and vision and the other senses come and vision and the other senses come together. They're mapped onto one together. They're mapped onto one together. They're mapped onto one another. &gt;&gt; It turns out that the story is more &gt;&gt; It turns out that the story is more &gt;&gt; It turns out that the story is more complicated and more interesting than complicated and more interesting than complicated and more interesting than that. I got hooked on that particular that. I got hooked on that particular that. I got hooked on that particular study that I mentioned at the beginning. study that I mentioned at the beginning. study that I mentioned at the beginning. So this was auditory signals in the So this was auditory signals in the So this was auditory signals in the superior caliculus being affected by the superior caliculus being affected by the superior caliculus being affected by the position of the eyes at the time the position of the eyes at the time the position of the eyes at the time the sound was presented. And now our sound was presented. And now our sound was presented. And now our audience knows about how sound is audience knows about how sound is audience knows about how sound is localized. We haven't talked that much localized. We haven't talked that much localized. We haven't talked that much about how visual information is about how visual information is about how visual information is localized. I think because mostly that's localized. I think because mostly that's localized. I think because mostly that's fairly obvious that your eye is fairly obvious that your eye is fairly obvious that your eye is kind of a little camera and light hits a kind of a little camera and light hits a kind of a little camera and light hits a particular uh location on the retina and particular uh location on the retina and particular uh location on the retina and that retinal location tells us what the that retinal location tells us what the that retinal location tells us what the location of the visual stimulus is. location of the visual stimulus is. location of the visual stimulus is. &gt;&gt; But it tells us the location of the &gt;&gt; But it tells us the location of the &gt;&gt; But it tells us the location of the visual stimulus with respect to the visual stimulus with respect to the visual stimulus with respect to the direction the eyes are pointing. But our direction the eyes are pointing. But our direction the eyes are pointing. But our sound localization cues are with respect sound localization cues are with respect sound localization cues are with respect to um where's the sound with respect to um where's the sound with respect to um where's the sound with respect to the head. So this finding that neurons the head. So this finding that neurons the head. So this finding that neurons were responsive to sound but cared very were responsive to sound but cared very were responsive to sound but cared very much about the position of the eyes was much about the position of the eyes was much about the position of the eyes was really you know a startling finding when really you know a startling finding when really you know a startling finding when it first came about. When I set up my it first came about. When I set up my it first came about. When I set up my own lab I basically set out to find out own lab I basically set out to find out own lab I basically set out to find out well where's where does this computation well where's where does this computation well where's where does this computation happen? Where is the brain um happen? Where is the brain um happen? Where is the brain um incorporating information about eye incorporating information about eye incorporating information about eye movements into the processing of movements into the processing of movements into the processing of sound? You know, we knew from the sound? You know, we knew from the sound? You know, we knew from the literature was okay, the superior literature was okay, the superior literature was okay, the superior caliculus is one of the places, but you caliculus is one of the places, but you caliculus is one of the places, but you know, does it does it happen in the know, does it does it happen in the know, does it does it happen in the superior caliculus or does it happen in superior caliculus or does it happen in superior caliculus or does it happen in a different brain area? And so we kind a different brain area? And so we kind a different brain area? And so we kind of marched along the auditory pathway in of marched along the auditory pathway in of marched along the auditory pathway in brain areas that I call them part of the brain areas that I call them part of the brain areas that I call them part of the auditory pathway because they're much auditory pathway because they're much auditory pathway because they're much more closely connected to the ear than more closely connected to the ear than more closely connected to the ear than to anything else. Um, and because at the to anything else. Um, and because at the to anything else. Um, and because at the time nobody thought there were visual time nobody thought there were visual time nobody thought there were visual signals in these areas. We thought it signals in these areas. We thought it signals in these areas. We thought it was just auditory. That too turned out was just auditory. That too turned out was just auditory. That too turned out not to be true, but they're definitely not to be true, but they're definitely not to be true, but they're definitely much more auditory than visual. And what much more auditory than visual. And what much more auditory than visual. And what we found was that in each of these we found was that in each of these we found was that in each of these areas, eye movements affect the auditory areas, eye movements affect the auditory areas, eye movements affect the auditory signals there too, even though they signals there too, even though they signals there too, even though they weren't in this convergent structure of weren't in this convergent structure of weren't in this convergent structure of the superior caliculus. the superior caliculus. the superior caliculus. So we decided that it would take a So we decided that it would take a So we decided that it would take a long time to march through every brain long time to march through every brain long time to march through every brain area and that it might be worth sort of area and that it might be worth sort of area and that it might be worth sort of jumping over a few brain areas and jumping over a few brain areas and jumping over a few brain areas and looking in the ear itself. looking in the ear itself. looking in the ear itself. So I need to give the audience a little So I need to give the audience a little So I need to give the audience a little bit more information about what you know bit more information about what you know bit more information about what you know what is possible in the ear and why that what is possible in the ear and why that what is possible in the ear and why that seemed like a reasonable thing to do. It seemed like a reasonable thing to do. It seemed like a reasonable thing to do. It has some little muscles in it. There are has some little muscles in it. There are has some little muscles in it. There are two muscles that control the bones of two muscles that control the bones of two muscles that control the bones of the middle ear. the middle ear. the middle ear. Uh and then inside the cookia there are Uh and then inside the cookia there are Uh and then inside the cookia there are uh cells called outer hair cells that uh cells called outer hair cells that uh cells called outer hair cells that can actually expand and contract just can actually expand and contract just can actually expand and contract just the way a little muscle could. the way a little muscle could. the way a little muscle could. &gt;&gt; We should explain the cookia is this &gt;&gt; We should explain the cookia is this &gt;&gt; We should explain the cookia is this snail-shaped structure that has the snail-shaped structure that has the snail-shaped structure that has the essentially the we call them neurons but essentially the we call them neurons but essentially the we call them neurons but these sensory cells that vibrate these sensory cells that vibrate these sensory cells that vibrate according to the frequency of the sound according to the frequency of the sound according to the frequency of the sound and this is and this is and this is &gt;&gt; critical for our perception of sound. &gt;&gt; critical for our perception of sound. &gt;&gt; critical for our perception of sound. Exactly. And you have one on each side. Exactly. And you have one on each side. Exactly. And you have one on each side. &gt;&gt; You have one on each side. It's &gt;&gt; You have one on each side. It's &gt;&gt; You have one on each side. It's snail-shaped and it's connected uh the snail-shaped and it's connected uh the snail-shaped and it's connected uh the vestibular. Um your balance structures vestibular. Um your balance structures vestibular. Um your balance structures are also connected to this as well. And are also connected to this as well. And are also connected to this as well. And to just describe the flow of to just describe the flow of to just describe the flow of information, you have you got your outer information, you have you got your outer information, you have you got your outer ear, you've got your ear canal, you have ear, you've got your ear canal, you have ear, you've got your ear canal, you have your eard drum, you've got these little your eard drum, you've got these little your eard drum, you've got these little bones that connect the eardrum to the bones that connect the eardrum to the bones that connect the eardrum to the cookia. And so there's muscles that um cookia. And so there's muscles that um cookia. And so there's muscles that um that affect the motion of those little that affect the motion of those little that affect the motion of those little bones. And then there's cells inside the bones. And then there's cells inside the bones. And then there's cells inside the cookia that can also act like muscles. cookia that can also act like muscles. cookia that can also act like muscles. these structures um get input from the these structures um get input from the these structures um get input from the brain. So we thought well if they're brain. So we thought well if they're brain. So we thought well if they're getting topdown input from the brain are getting topdown input from the brain are getting topdown input from the brain are they getting a top- down input from the they getting a top- down input from the they getting a top- down input from the brain that carries information about brain that carries information about brain that carries information about the position of the eyes? You know about the position of the eyes? You know about the position of the eyes? You know that it seemed like it seemed kind of that it seemed like it seemed kind of that it seemed like it seemed kind of like a wild possibility but not like a wild possibility but not like a wild possibility but not completely out of left field like there completely out of left field like there completely out of left field like there was a possible mechanism here that we was a possible mechanism here that we was a possible mechanism here that we could imagine. could imagine. could imagine. And the neat thing about this is that um And the neat thing about this is that um And the neat thing about this is that um we didn't have to do something like we didn't have to do something like we didn't have to do something like stick an electrode into these muscles stick an electrode into these muscles stick an electrode into these muscles because they're attached to the bones because they're attached to the bones because they're attached to the bones and attached to the eardrum. And so if and attached to the eardrum. And so if and attached to the eardrum. And so if they were being manipulated by a top they were being manipulated by a top they were being manipulated by a top down signal from the brain, they would down signal from the brain, they would down signal from the brain, they would tug these bones and that would tug these bones and that would tug these bones and that would tug the eardrum. the eardrum. the eardrum. And when the eardrum moves, normally it And when the eardrum moves, normally it And when the eardrum moves, normally it moves in response to sound, but if it moves in response to sound, but if it moves in response to sound, but if it moves in the absence of sound, it's moves in the absence of sound, it's moves in the absence of sound, it's going to make a sound. going to make a sound. going to make a sound. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; So you could put a microphone in the ear &gt;&gt; So you could put a microphone in the ear &gt;&gt; So you could put a microphone in the ear canal to see whether or not anything was canal to see whether or not anything was canal to see whether or not anything was happening in connection with eye happening in connection with eye happening in connection with eye movements. And this too wasn't out in movements. And this too wasn't out in movements. And this too wasn't out in left field to do this because um there's left field to do this because um there's left field to do this because um there's already kind of known signals generated already kind of known signals generated already kind of known signals generated by these kinds of structures that are by these kinds of structures that are by these kinds of structures that are measured by clinicians by aiologists and measured by clinicians by aiologists and measured by clinicians by aiologists and otoarangologists. and otoarangologists. and otoarangologists. Um you can put a microphone in the ear Um you can put a microphone in the ear Um you can put a microphone in the ear and you can measure things called oto and you can measure things called oto and you can measure things called oto acoustic emissions. acoustic emissions. acoustic emissions. &gt;&gt; Basically your ears are making sounds &gt;&gt; Basically your ears are making sounds &gt;&gt; Basically your ears are making sounds folks. &gt;&gt; Your ears are making sounds folks. I &gt;&gt; Your ears are making sounds folks. I &gt;&gt; Your ears are making sounds folks. I know it's weird. It's kind of wild. know it's weird. It's kind of wild. know it's weird. It's kind of wild. &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than others. &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than &gt;&gt; Some people make more of them than others. Exactly. So, we wanted to know others. Exactly. So, we wanted to know others. Exactly. So, we wanted to know if any of these little sounds were being if any of these little sounds were being if any of these little sounds were being generated with eye movements. And I generated with eye movements. And I generated with eye movements. And I wouldn't be here telling you this story wouldn't be here telling you this story wouldn't be here telling you this story if it didn't turn out that yes, they do. if it didn't turn out that yes, they do. if it didn't turn out that yes, they do. So, we were able to measure that the So, we were able to measure that the So, we were able to measure that the eardrum is basically moving in eardrum is basically moving in eardrum is basically moving in connection with every eye movement, connection with every eye movement, connection with every eye movement, every psychic eye movement. These are every psychic eye movement. These are every psychic eye movement. These are the fast jerky eye movements. There's the fast jerky eye movements. There's the fast jerky eye movements. There's other kinds of eye movements and we other kinds of eye movements and we other kinds of eye movements and we haven't yet tested them. The signal is haven't yet tested them. The signal is haven't yet tested them. The signal is very precisely time locked to the onset very precisely time locked to the onset very precisely time locked to the onset of the eye movement of the eye movement of the eye movement and the effect um is different in the and the effect um is different in the and the effect um is different in the two ears. So that if your eyes are two ears. So that if your eyes are two ears. So that if your eyes are moving to the left, the eardrum on the moving to the left, the eardrum on the moving to the left, the eardrum on the right is going to kind of uh bulge right is going to kind of uh bulge right is going to kind of uh bulge inward then outward then inward. I might inward then outward then inward. I might inward then outward then inward. I might have this backwards um but whatever the have this backwards um but whatever the have this backwards um but whatever the right ear is doing the left ear is doing right ear is doing the left ear is doing right ear is doing the left ear is doing the opposite so that the eardrums are the opposite so that the eardrums are the opposite so that the eardrums are going to be moving in the same going to be moving in the same going to be moving in the same direction. One is going to be inward direction. One is going to be inward direction. One is going to be inward when the other is going outward when the other is going outward when the other is going outward &gt;&gt; like a wave. &gt;&gt; like a wave. &gt;&gt; like a wave. &gt;&gt; Like a wave. Exactly. Like a wave. Not &gt;&gt; Like a wave. Exactly. Like a wave. Not &gt;&gt; Like a wave. Exactly. Like a wave. Not like a like a like a &gt;&gt; not flapping. &gt;&gt; not flapping. &gt;&gt; not flapping. &gt;&gt; Not like flapping. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Not like flapping. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Not like flapping. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Exactly. You know, we're still actually &gt;&gt; Exactly. You know, we're still actually &gt;&gt; Exactly. You know, we're still actually at pretty early days and understanding at pretty early days and understanding at pretty early days and understanding this process and u what it's for, this process and u what it's for, this process and u what it's for, but it's very precise signal. It turns but it's very precise signal. It turns but it's very precise signal. It turns out to carry information uh about how out to carry information uh about how out to carry information uh about how far the eyes are moving to the left or far the eyes are moving to the left or far the eyes are moving to the left or to the right as well as a bit less but to the right as well as a bit less but to the right as well as a bit less but some information about vertical some information about vertical some information about vertical movements as well. M movements as well. M movements as well. M &gt;&gt; and we think that this may be kind of &gt;&gt; and we think that this may be kind of &gt;&gt; and we think that this may be kind of the first step in that integration of the first step in that integration of the first step in that integration of visual and auditory information visual and auditory information visual and auditory information &gt;&gt; which would be the critical first step &gt;&gt; which would be the critical first step &gt;&gt; which would be the critical first step if the major goal of this integration of if the major goal of this integration of if the major goal of this integration of visual and auditory is for localization visual and auditory is for localization visual and auditory is for localization of sounds right of sounds right of sounds right &gt;&gt; because the you know in um &gt;&gt; because the you know in um &gt;&gt; because the you know in um as a neuroscientist you know there's so as a neuroscientist you know there's so as a neuroscientist you know there's so many different areas of neuroscience many different areas of neuroscience many different areas of neuroscience like I used to marvel at you go to a like I used to marvel at you go to a like I used to marvel at you go to a meeting you got people saying meeting you got people saying meeting you got people saying consciousness and working on consciousness and working on consciousness and working on consciousness. You have people trying to consciousness. You have people trying to consciousness. You have people trying to figure out how a single photo receptor figure out how a single photo receptor figure out how a single photo receptor works or a single hair cell works. And works or a single hair cell works. And works or a single hair cell works. And so when I think about a sensory system, so when I think about a sensory system, so when I think about a sensory system, I think about layers of sophistication I think about layers of sophistication I think about layers of sophistication and how they likely evolved and how they likely evolved and how they likely evolved &gt;&gt; like very briefly. I mean the visual &gt;&gt; like very briefly. I mean the visual &gt;&gt; like very briefly. I mean the visual system first evolved to detect light and system first evolved to detect light and system first evolved to detect light and dark on the order of 24 hours. So you dark on the order of 24 hours. So you dark on the order of 24 hours. So you know the difference between nighttime know the difference between nighttime know the difference between nighttime and daytime and daytime and daytime which means even with the total which means even with the total which means even with the total inability to see objects, you are safer inability to see objects, you are safer inability to see objects, you are safer if you know when to stay in and when to if you know when to stay in and when to if you know when to stay in and when to go out. go out. go out. &gt;&gt; And then at some point we evolve the &gt;&gt; And then at some point we evolve the &gt;&gt; And then at some point we evolve the ability to um probably motion detection ability to um probably motion detection ability to um probably motion detection came before the ability to send to see came before the ability to send to see came before the ability to send to see detail because it's way more important detail because it's way more important detail because it's way more important to know if something's big and coming at to know if something's big and coming at to know if something's big and coming at you big and moving away, you big and moving away, you big and moving away, &gt;&gt; right? or help you stay oriented like &gt;&gt; right? or help you stay oriented like &gt;&gt; right? or help you stay oriented like with respect to like knowing what's up with respect to like knowing what's up with respect to like knowing what's up and what's down and staying upright. and what's down and staying upright. and what's down and staying upright. &gt;&gt; That's right. And just like uh the &gt;&gt; That's right. And just like uh the &gt;&gt; That's right. And just like uh the falling uh reflex is probably the most falling uh reflex is probably the most falling uh reflex is probably the most important reflex in the vestibular important reflex in the vestibular important reflex in the vestibular system to brace yourself so you don't system to brace yourself so you don't system to brace yourself so you don't &gt;&gt; you have a lesser chance of dying if you &gt;&gt; you have a lesser chance of dying if you &gt;&gt; you have a lesser chance of dying if you fall. Right. You know if your visual fall. Right. You know if your visual fall. Right. You know if your visual world suddenly goes up very quick, you world suddenly goes up very quick, you world suddenly goes up very quick, you know you're falling, know you're falling, know you're falling, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And then comes, you know, additional &gt;&gt; And then comes, you know, additional &gt;&gt; And then comes, you know, additional layers of sophistication like fine layers of sophistication like fine layers of sophistication like fine detail, color vision. color vision detail, color vision. color vision detail, color vision. color vision probably evolved last at least probably evolved last at least probably evolved last at least &gt;&gt; chromatic color vision but and then so &gt;&gt; chromatic color vision but and then so &gt;&gt; chromatic color vision but and then so in the auditory system I think like the in the auditory system I think like the in the auditory system I think like the same thing same thing same thing &gt;&gt; you need to be able to know probably um &gt;&gt; you need to be able to know probably um &gt;&gt; you need to be able to know probably um which direction a sound is coming from which direction a sound is coming from which direction a sound is coming from is it low or high frequency is it low or high frequency is it low or high frequency um and then and on and on right you know um and then and on and on right you know um and then and on and on right you know and so I think about that like in the and so I think about that like in the and so I think about that like in the motor system that the oldest we know the motor system that the oldest we know the motor system that the oldest we know the evolutionary history of the genes the evolutionary history of the genes the evolutionary history of the genes that are expressed in like the that are expressed in like the that are expressed in like the motor neurons that move the trunk are motor neurons that move the trunk are motor neurons that move the trunk are the same ones the same ones the same ones &gt;&gt; that undulating uh &gt;&gt; that undulating uh &gt;&gt; that undulating uh &gt;&gt; fish use. And actually, this will get us &gt;&gt; fish use. And actually, this will get us &gt;&gt; fish use. And actually, this will get us back to sound, I promise. And then back to sound, I promise. And then back to sound, I promise. And then there's the these additional layers of there's the these additional layers of there's the these additional layers of motor neurons that have been added motor neurons that have been added motor neurons that have been added through evolution, the ones that flap through evolution, the ones that flap through evolution, the ones that flap the fins. And then the final addition the fins. And then the final addition the fins. And then the final addition are the motor neurons that control fine are the motor neurons that control fine are the motor neurons that control fine movement of the fingers. M movement of the fingers. M movement of the fingers. M &gt;&gt; so I have this kind of obsession with &gt;&gt; so I have this kind of obsession with &gt;&gt; so I have this kind of obsession with this because if you look at music that's this because if you look at music that's this because if you look at music that's very um primitive right like you just very um primitive right like you just very um primitive right like you just look historically speaking I'm not look historically speaking I'm not look historically speaking I'm not casting judgment on music just casting judgment on music just casting judgment on music just historically um it's rich in bass tones historically um it's rich in bass tones historically um it's rich in bass tones relative to high frequency tones relative to high frequency tones relative to high frequency tones &gt;&gt; and dance that we assign as primitive &gt;&gt; and dance that we assign as primitive &gt;&gt; and dance that we assign as primitive tends to involve a lot of movement of tends to involve a lot of movement of tends to involve a lot of movement of the of the trunk the of the trunk the of the trunk &gt;&gt; you're not people aren't just like flap &gt;&gt; you're not people aren't just like flap &gt;&gt; you're not people aren't just like flap ing their fingers and toes out there ing their fingers and toes out there ing their fingers and toes out there right &gt;&gt; now. So the as you go from low to high &gt;&gt; now. So the as you go from low to high &gt;&gt; now. So the as you go from low to high frequency, there's a body map of low to frequency, there's a body map of low to frequency, there's a body map of low to high frequency. high frequency. high frequency. &gt;&gt; And actually if when people are making a &gt;&gt; And actually if when people are making a &gt;&gt; And actually if when people are making a very detailed point, they'll often like very detailed point, they'll often like very detailed point, they'll often like point with their fingers. They'll like point with their fingers. They'll like point with their fingers. They'll move their fingers. move their fingers. move their fingers. &gt;&gt; But when we want to emphasize a big &gt;&gt; But when we want to emphasize a big &gt;&gt; But when we want to emphasize a big point, we use our whole body. We put our point, we use our whole body. We put our point, we use our whole body. We put our whole body into it. So I actually whole body into it. So I actually whole body into it. So I actually believe that all the sensory systems are believe that all the sensory systems are believe that all the sensory systems are mapped to one another in a way that goes mapped to one another in a way that goes mapped to one another in a way that goes from low frequency to high frequency. from low frequency to high frequency. from low frequency to high frequency. &gt;&gt; Intensity is important and direction is &gt;&gt; Intensity is important and direction is &gt;&gt; Intensity is important and direction is important. me pointing at you, which I important. me pointing at you, which I important. me pointing at you, which I even feels funny to do because we're on even feels funny to do because we're on even feels funny to do because we're on good terms. As far as I as far as I'm good terms. As far as I as far as I'm good terms. As far as I as far as I'm concerned, I we're on good terms, you concerned, I we're on good terms, you concerned, I we're on good terms, you know, um is very different than uh know, um is very different than uh know, um is very different than uh me standing back and if I come at you me standing back and if I come at you me standing back and if I come at you with my whole body, it's very different with my whole body, it's very different with my whole body, it's very different than if I point a finger for instance, than if I point a finger for instance, than if I point a finger for instance, right? So, I feel like these things right? So, I feel like these things right? So, I feel like these things probably evolved from this in parallel probably evolved from this in parallel probably evolved from this in parallel &gt;&gt; and as you pointed out before, they &gt;&gt; and as you pointed out before, they &gt;&gt; and as you pointed out before, they serve an adaptive role, serve an adaptive role, serve an adaptive role, &gt;&gt; right? So the fact that position of the &gt;&gt; right? So the fact that position of the &gt;&gt; right? So the fact that position of the eyes can change the way I hear seems eyes can change the way I hear seems eyes can change the way I hear seems wild and that's a wild and that's a wild and that's a wild thing. Um is the inverse also true? Is thing. Um is the inverse also true? Is thing. Um is the inverse also true? Is is where I listen affecting um how my is where I listen affecting um how my is where I listen affecting um how my eyes Yeah. my where I hear something eyes Yeah. my where I hear something eyes Yeah. my where I hear something typically directs my head movement and typically directs my head movement and typically directs my head movement and my eye movement. So this is just the my eye movement. So this is just the my eye movement. So this is just the same thing in reverse. same thing in reverse. same thing in reverse. &gt;&gt; It's part of I think it's all part of an &gt;&gt; It's part of I think it's all part of an &gt;&gt; It's part of I think it's all part of an integrated system. Um, you know, we integrated system. Um, you know, we integrated system. Um, you know, we talked about the top down control over talked about the top down control over talked about the top down control over the ear, but there's a lot of top- down the ear, but there's a lot of top- down the ear, but there's a lot of top- down control over vision, too. And some of it control over vision, too. And some of it control over vision, too. And some of it is a little easier to understand than is a little easier to understand than is a little easier to understand than what I just described because blinking what I just described because blinking what I just described because blinking is top- down control over vision. Uh, is top- down control over vision. Uh, is top- down control over vision. Uh, eye movements, top down control over eye movements, top down control over eye movements, top down control over vision. Focusing the lens of your eye, vision. Focusing the lens of your eye, vision. Focusing the lens of your eye, right? That's also top down control. right? That's also top down control. right? That's also top down control. &gt;&gt; Um, there are descending connections &gt;&gt; Um, there are descending connections &gt;&gt; Um, there are descending connections from the brain to the retina itself that from the brain to the retina itself that from the brain to the retina itself that nobody understands. nobody understands. nobody understands. Apologies to the people working on this. Apologies to the people working on this. Apologies to the people working on this. I really want you to keep working on I really want you to keep working on I really want you to keep working on this, but I feel like there isn't a this, but I feel like there isn't a this, but I feel like there isn't a clear theory yet about what exactly clear theory yet about what exactly clear theory yet about what exactly these descending connections might be these descending connections might be these descending connections might be doing. From what I know about it, they doing. From what I know about it, they doing. From what I know about it, they are uh, you know, pretty diffuse are uh, you know, pretty diffuse are uh, you know, pretty diffuse connections, the pretty broad branching connections, the pretty broad branching connections, the pretty broad branching of neurons uh, throughout the retina of neurons uh, throughout the retina of neurons uh, throughout the retina or not throughout the whole retina, but or not throughout the whole retina, but or not throughout the whole retina, but probably not well suited to but probably not well suited to but probably not well suited to manipulating fine spatial detail, but manipulating fine spatial detail, but manipulating fine spatial detail, but could very well be suited to could very well be suited to could very well be suited to incorporating some kind of circadian influence to the some kind of circadian influence to the some kind of circadian influence to the retina itself or something else that retina itself or something else that retina itself or something else that you want the same signal to be that you want the same signal to be that you want the same signal to be broadly available throughout about the broadly available throughout about the broadly available throughout about the retina. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the fact before on this podcast about the fact before on this podcast about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is that getting a great night's sleep is that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, the foundation of mental health, the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. When physical health, and performance. When physical health, and performance. When we aren't doing that on a consistent we aren't doing that on a consistent we aren't doing that on a consistent basis, everything suffers. And when we basis, everything suffers. And when we basis, everything suffers. And when we are sleeping well and enough, our mental are sleeping well and enough, our mental are sleeping well and enough, our mental health, our physical health, and our health, our physical health, and our health, our physical health, and our performance in all endeavors improves performance in all endeavors improves performance in all endeavors improves marketkedly. Now, the mattress you sleep marketkedly. Now, the mattress you sleep marketkedly. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of on makes a huge difference in terms of the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each the quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft that mattress is, how night. How soft that mattress is, how night. How soft that mattress is, how firm it is, how breathable it is, all firm it is, how breathable it is, all firm it is, how breathable it is, all play into how well you'll sleep, how play into how well you'll sleep, how play into how well you'll sleep, how much deep sleep you get, how much rapid much deep sleep you get, how much rapid much deep sleep you get, how much rapid eye movement sleep, and it needs to be eye movement sleep, and it needs to be eye movement sleep, and it needs to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. So, tailored to your unique sleep needs. So, tailored to your unique sleep needs. So, if you go to the Helix website, you can if you go to the Helix website, you can if you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz, and it take a brief two-minute quiz, and it take a brief two-minute quiz, and it will ask you questions such as, do you will ask you questions such as, do you will ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your back, your side, or your sleep on your back, your side, or your sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? Things of that sort. during the night? Things of that sort. during the night? Things of that sort. Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those Maybe you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't. Either way, questions, maybe you don't. Either way, questions, maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress, Dusk. I out to be the Dusk mattress, Dusk. I out to be the Dusk mattress, Dusk. I started sleeping on a Dusk mattress started sleeping on a Dusk mattress started sleeping on a Dusk mattress about three and a half years ago, and about three and a half years ago, and about three and a half years ago, and it's been far and away the best sleep it's been far and away the best sleep it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. So, if you'd like to that I've ever had. So, if you'd like to that I've ever had. So, if you'd like to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to try Helix, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix Take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is will match you to a mattress that is customized for your unique sleep needs. customized for your unique sleep needs. customized for your unique sleep needs. Right now, Helix is giving a special Right now, Helix is giving a special Right now, Helix is giving a special offer to Hubberman podcast listeners of offer to Hubberman podcast listeners of offer to Hubberman podcast listeners of up to 27% off sitewide. Again, that's up to 27% off sitewide. Again, that's up to 27% off sitewide. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman. I want to talk a little bit about I want to talk a little bit about I want to talk a little bit about physical spaces. physical spaces. physical spaces. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Recently, I was in New York and someone &gt;&gt; Recently, I was in New York and someone &gt;&gt; Recently, I was in New York and someone took me to Grand Central where there are took me to Grand Central where there are took me to Grand Central where there are these incredible um arches these incredible um arches these incredible um arches &gt;&gt; in one of the hallways there. &gt;&gt; in one of the hallways there. &gt;&gt; in one of the hallways there. &gt;&gt; Um people should check this out. It's &gt;&gt; Um people should check this out. It's &gt;&gt; Um people should check this out. It's really, really cool. really, really cool. really, really cool. &gt;&gt; It is beautiful. &gt;&gt; It is beautiful. &gt;&gt; It is beautiful. &gt;&gt; It's beautiful. You have this high &gt;&gt; It's beautiful. You have this high &gt;&gt; It's beautiful. You have this high ceiling main kind of chamber room of the ceiling main kind of chamber room of the ceiling main kind of chamber room of the of Grand Central. Um, and of Grand Central. Um, and of Grand Central. Um, and there's also a hallway off to one side there's also a hallway off to one side there's also a hallway off to one side where you can go into a corner. Do you where you can go into a corner. Do you where you can go into a corner. Do you know about this? Uh, know about this? Uh, know about this? Uh, &gt;&gt; and you can face into the corner like &gt;&gt; and you can face into the corner like &gt;&gt; and you can face into the corner like you were going to, you know, like you're you were going to, you know, like you're you were going to, you know, like you're facing the corner in shame, but you're facing the corner in shame, but you're facing the corner in shame, but you're not. &gt;&gt; And whoever you're with can go to the &gt;&gt; And whoever you're with can go to the &gt;&gt; And whoever you're with can go to the opposite diagonal corner. opposite diagonal corner. opposite diagonal corner. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The ceiling is shaped like a somewhat &gt;&gt; The ceiling is shaped like a somewhat &gt;&gt; The ceiling is shaped like a somewhat of a dome. Uh-huh. of a dome. Uh-huh. of a dome. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; It's contoured, but it's more or less a &gt;&gt; It's contoured, but it's more or less a &gt;&gt; It's contoured, but it's more or less a small a small dome, small a small dome, small a small dome, &gt;&gt; but you are easily &gt;&gt; but you are easily &gt;&gt; but you are easily 25 ft away from this person that you're 25 ft away from this person that you're 25 ft away from this person that you're there with. there with. there with. &gt;&gt; Again, diagonal corner. &gt;&gt; Again, diagonal corner. &gt;&gt; Again, diagonal corner. &gt;&gt; And if you speak at a &gt;&gt; And if you speak at a &gt;&gt; And if you speak at a very, very low volume, very, very low volume, very, very low volume, they can hear you on the opposite side. they can hear you on the opposite side. they can hear you on the opposite side. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And if they speak, you can hear them. &gt;&gt; And if they speak, you can hear them. &gt;&gt; And if they speak, you can hear them. And what's wild is there's a lot of And what's wild is there's a lot of And what's wild is there's a lot of noise in the environment. This is Grand noise in the environment. This is Grand noise in the environment. This is Grand Central Station. Central Station. Central Station. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And we played with this a little bit &gt;&gt; And we played with this a little bit &gt;&gt; And we played with this a little bit like if high frequency sounds do seem to like if high frequency sounds do seem to like if high frequency sounds do seem to travel a little bit a little bit better travel a little bit a little bit better travel a little bit a little bit better in this uh environment because if one in this uh environment because if one in this uh environment because if one person laughs, you can hear it very person laughs, you can hear it very person laughs, you can hear it very clearly. &gt;&gt; Um but you can whisper &gt;&gt; Um but you can whisper &gt;&gt; Um but you can whisper and they'll hear you and they're 25 ft and they'll hear you and they're 25 ft and they'll hear you and they're 25 ft away in a major city with a ton of city away in a major city with a ton of city away in a major city with a ton of city noise, &gt;&gt; right? And so obviously the sound waves &gt;&gt; right? And so obviously the sound waves &gt;&gt; right? And so obviously the sound waves are traveling along the ceiling are traveling along the ceiling are traveling along the ceiling &gt;&gt; on that parabola. &gt;&gt; on that parabola. &gt;&gt; on that parabola. &gt;&gt; And it's just it's a it's a no pun &gt;&gt; And it's just it's a it's a no pun &gt;&gt; And it's just it's a it's a no pun intended. It's a mind bend to experience intended. It's a mind bend to experience intended. It's a mind bend to experience sound &gt;&gt; coming from some from a distance far &gt;&gt; coming from some from a distance far &gt;&gt; coming from some from a distance far away, &gt;&gt; not through a device &gt;&gt; not through a device &gt;&gt; not through a device that is clearly being spoken at a low that is clearly being spoken at a low that is clearly being spoken at a low level, like a whisper, but you can hear level, like a whisper, but you can hear level, like a whisper, but you can hear it. In the same way that it always it. In the same way that it always it. In the same way that it always weirds me out when I'm in San Diego in weirds me out when I'm in San Diego in weirds me out when I'm in San Diego in the winter and the days are short, but the winter and the days are short, but the winter and the days are short, but it's like 80°. Like when days are short, it's like 80°. Like when days are short, it's like 80°. Like when days are short, it's supposed to be colder. it's supposed to be colder. it's supposed to be colder. &gt;&gt; Yes. love San Diego. Great great tacos, &gt;&gt; Yes. love San Diego. Great great tacos, &gt;&gt; Yes. love San Diego. Great great tacos, great people. But um they're always great people. But um they're always great people. But um they're always talking about tacos down there. But um talking about tacos down there. But um talking about tacos down there. But um &gt;&gt; it's so strange to be in a short day &gt;&gt; it's so strange to be in a short day &gt;&gt; it's so strange to be in a short day where it's hot. where it's hot. where it's hot. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Because even if I go visit my relatives &gt;&gt; Because even if I go visit my relatives &gt;&gt; Because even if I go visit my relatives in Argentina who experience Christmas in Argentina who experience Christmas in Argentina who experience Christmas in the summer, the days are long and it's the summer, the days are long and it's the summer, the days are long and it's hot and it's Christmas and Santa Claus hot and it's Christmas and Santa Claus hot and it's Christmas and Santa Claus is supposed to be in a sleigh in the is supposed to be in a sleigh in the is supposed to be in a sleigh in the snow, but that's a whole different snow, but that's a whole different snow, but that's a whole different thing. &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. But there's something about &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. But there's something about &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. But there's something about the way our nervous system is mapped the way our nervous system is mapped the way our nervous system is mapped where we expect soft sounds to not where we expect soft sounds to not where we expect soft sounds to not travel very far. travel very far. travel very far. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; The opposite would be like shouting and &gt;&gt; The opposite would be like shouting and &gt;&gt; The opposite would be like shouting and your voice just disappears even though your voice just disappears even though your voice just disappears even though the person's right in front of you. It the person's right in front of you. It the person's right in front of you. It is so weird. And I feel like people is so weird. And I feel like people is so weird. And I feel like people should experience this natural naturally should experience this natural naturally should experience this natural naturally occurring experiment occurring experiment occurring experiment &gt;&gt; because it you walk away from that &gt;&gt; because it you walk away from that &gt;&gt; because it you walk away from that understanding sound understanding sound understanding sound &gt;&gt; intensity and frequency and localization &gt;&gt; intensity and frequency and localization &gt;&gt; intensity and frequency and localization completely differently. It changed the completely differently. It changed the completely differently. It changed the way I think about this. And it has way I think about this. And it has way I think about this. And it has nothing to do with being a nothing to do with being a nothing to do with being a neuroscientist. You're like, that's neuroscientist. You're like, that's neuroscientist. You're like, that's crazy. I can hear a whisper from 25 ft crazy. I can hear a whisper from 25 ft crazy. I can hear a whisper from 25 ft away. And I wondered, is this what it's away. And I wondered, is this what it's away. And I wondered, is this what it's like to be a wolf? like to be a wolf? like to be a wolf? &gt;&gt; That would be really cool. It would also &gt;&gt; That would be really cool. It would also &gt;&gt; That would be really cool. It would also be really irritating be really irritating be really irritating &gt;&gt; because you don't want to hear all the &gt;&gt; because you don't want to hear all the &gt;&gt; because you don't want to hear all the things that people are saying all the things that people are saying all the things that people are saying all the time, &gt;&gt; right? I mean, this is one of the &gt;&gt; right? I mean, this is one of the &gt;&gt; right? I mean, this is one of the problems with hearing aids. They amplify problems with hearing aids. They amplify problems with hearing aids. They amplify everything. &gt;&gt; It's not replacing what your brain does. &gt;&gt; It's not replacing what your brain does. &gt;&gt; It's not replacing what your brain does. It's not replacing what your ear It's not replacing what your ear It's not replacing what your ear normally does. normally does. normally does. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's such a mindbend. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's such a mindbend. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's such a mindbend. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um it's so cool and it if you provide &gt;&gt; Um it's so cool and it if you provide &gt;&gt; Um it's so cool and it if you provide you're in New York, it costs nothing to you're in New York, it costs nothing to you're in New York, it costs nothing to do it. It's just you just have to wait do it. It's just you just have to wait do it. It's just you just have to wait your turn. People are catching on to your turn. People are catching on to your turn. People are catching on to this or it's been known for a while. I'd this or it's been known for a while. I'd this or it's been known for a while. I'd like to get your thoughts on the like to get your thoughts on the like to get your thoughts on the opposite example where if you go into a opposite example where if you go into a opposite example where if you go into a like a high ceiling cathedral church, like a high ceiling cathedral church, like a high ceiling cathedral church, &gt;&gt; um what do high ceilings do for our &gt;&gt; um what do high ceilings do for our &gt;&gt; um what do high ceilings do for our perception of sound given that there's a perception of sound given that there's a perception of sound given that there's a lot of space for the sound to travel? lot of space for the sound to travel? lot of space for the sound to travel? I'm not sure that I can add something I'm not sure that I can add something I'm not sure that I can add something that's really specific to that that's really specific to that that's really specific to that particular circumstance, but to say more particular circumstance, but to say more particular circumstance, but to say more generally that, you know, the sounds generally that, you know, the sounds generally that, you know, the sounds that we experience in a particular that we experience in a particular that we experience in a particular setting are really the combination of setting are really the combination of setting are really the combination of all of the reflective surfaces that are all of the reflective surfaces that are all of the reflective surfaces that are in that setting. And so, like if you in that setting. And so, like if you in that setting. And so, like if you have a carpeted room, that's going to have a carpeted room, that's going to have a carpeted room, that's going to absorb sound from the on the floor. And absorb sound from the on the floor. And absorb sound from the on the floor. And so you're going to it's going to take so you're going to it's going to take so you're going to it's going to take out one part of what um what you would out one part of what um what you would out one part of what um what you would be hearing in a room that is not be hearing in a room that is not be hearing in a room that is not carpeted. &gt;&gt; Um and the high ceilings, I would &gt;&gt; Um and the high ceilings, I would &gt;&gt; Um and the high ceilings, I would imagine that would kind of depends on imagine that would kind of depends on imagine that would kind of depends on what the surfaces are on the ceiling. Um what the surfaces are on the ceiling. Um what the surfaces are on the ceiling. Um one thing that'll happen in that kind of one thing that'll happen in that kind of one thing that'll happen in that kind of setting is that the sounds that go up setting is that the sounds that go up setting is that the sounds that go up that way, if it's a hard surface, that way, if it's a hard surface, that way, if it's a hard surface, they'll probably bounce off and come they'll probably bounce off and come they'll probably bounce off and come back down, but with a long delay. And back down, but with a long delay. And back down, but with a long delay. And once the delays get pretty long, then once the delays get pretty long, then once the delays get pretty long, then you do start to hear it as a whole you do start to hear it as a whole you do start to hear it as a whole separate sound. separate sound. separate sound. &gt;&gt; Almost like an echo. &gt;&gt; Almost like an echo. &gt;&gt; Almost like an echo. &gt;&gt; Not even almost like an echo, but &gt;&gt; Not even almost like an echo, but &gt;&gt; Not even almost like an echo, but actually an echo. actually an echo. actually an echo. &gt;&gt; Do you think this is used to amplify &gt;&gt; Do you think this is used to amplify &gt;&gt; Do you think this is used to amplify aspects of the music? aspects of the music? aspects of the music? &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe that's why some of the &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe that's why some of the &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe that's why some of the older genres of music older genres of music older genres of music can be a little slower can be a little slower can be a little slower and chants. and chants. and chants. &gt;&gt; Yeah. longer sustained notes because you &gt;&gt; Yeah. longer sustained notes because you &gt;&gt; Yeah. longer sustained notes because you don't want to have too many transitions don't want to have too many transitions don't want to have too many transitions from one note to the next. from one note to the next. from one note to the next. &gt;&gt; Gregorian chant is a wonderful example &gt;&gt; Gregorian chant is a wonderful example &gt;&gt; Gregorian chant is a wonderful example really kind of long slow sustained really kind of long slow sustained really kind of long slow sustained um many different voices blending um many different voices blending um many different voices blending together versus a much faster like together versus a much faster like together versus a much faster like Mozart um minuette or something like Mozart um minuette or something like Mozart um minuette or something like that like those notes would just jumble that like those notes would just jumble that like those notes would just jumble together with the kind of delay that together with the kind of delay that together with the kind of delay that we're talking about. Yeah, it's I mean we're talking about. Yeah, it's I mean we're talking about. Yeah, it's I mean I think that um the ability to um I think that um the ability to um I think that um the ability to um localize sound. We talked about we localize sound. We talked about we localize sound. We talked about we talked about quality of sound based on talked about quality of sound based on talked about quality of sound based on high and low frequency. And I high and low frequency. And I high and low frequency. And I confess I'm a little fixated um on confess I'm a little fixated um on confess I'm a little fixated um on this idea that this idea that this idea that &gt;&gt; when people join together in sound that &gt;&gt; when people join together in sound that &gt;&gt; when people join together in sound that you're communicating something very you're communicating something very you're communicating something very important that that's the most important that that's the most important that that's the most effective way to communicate a feeling. effective way to communicate a feeling. effective way to communicate a feeling. And people say, "Well, of course you go And people say, "Well, of course you go And people say, "Well, of course you go to a concert and you feel something, but to a concert and you feel something, but to a concert and you feel something, but in the concert, right, you have the in the concert, right, you have the in the concert, right, you have the performers, but the audience is often performers, but the audience is often performers, but the audience is often singing with them, singing with them, singing with them, &gt;&gt; right? I know." Which is one of the most &gt;&gt; right? I know." Which is one of the most &gt;&gt; right? I know." Which is one of the most wonderful things. wonderful things. wonderful things. &gt;&gt; I recently wondered if uh I was trying &gt;&gt; I recently wondered if uh I was trying &gt;&gt; I recently wondered if uh I was trying to think back to like the '9s and what to think back to like the '9s and what to think back to like the '9s and what created effective movements. Um and what created effective movements. Um and what created effective movements. Um and I thought maybe what we need in America I thought maybe what we need in America I thought maybe what we need in America right now is we need um like music that right now is we need um like music that right now is we need um like music that actually brings people together. Sounds actually brings people together. Sounds actually brings people together. Sounds really corny, really corny, really corny, &gt;&gt; but I really believe this. No, I do &gt;&gt; but I really believe this. No, I do &gt;&gt; but I really believe this. No, I do think that would be helpful. think that would be helpful. think that would be helpful. &gt;&gt; Maybe there just too many different &gt;&gt; Maybe there just too many different &gt;&gt; Maybe there just too many different musical tastes now. musical tastes now. musical tastes now. &gt;&gt; I &gt;&gt; I &gt;&gt; I &gt;&gt; So, we should start by telling people &gt;&gt; So, we should start by telling people &gt;&gt; So, we should start by telling people you can't have that taste. you can't have that taste. you can't have that taste. &gt;&gt; Well, there should be a new [laughter] &gt;&gt; Well, there should be a new [laughter] &gt;&gt; Well, there should be a new [laughter] one, &gt;&gt; right? And maybe it should be very &gt;&gt; right? And maybe it should be very &gt;&gt; right? And maybe it should be very uh very primitive. I mean, the haka uh very primitive. I mean, the haka uh very primitive. I mean, the haka thing that we talked about earlier is thing that we talked about earlier is thing that we talked about earlier is a kind it's an angry intention, a kind it's an angry intention, a kind it's an angry intention, &gt;&gt; right? But um and this is I guess where &gt;&gt; right? But um and this is I guess where &gt;&gt; right? But um and this is I guess where people will think like my East people will think like my East people will think like my East Coast relatives will be like, "Oh, you Coast relatives will be like, "Oh, you Coast relatives will be like, "Oh, you want us all the kumbaya? I have want us all the kumbaya? I have want us all the kumbaya? I have relatives from Jersey. So they're like, relatives from Jersey. So they're like, relatives from Jersey. So they're like, we're I know out there in California, we're I know out there in California, we're I know out there in California, you're all kumbaya, but I think that the you're all kumbaya, but I think that the you're all kumbaya, but I think that the we're sort of half joking here. we're sort of half joking here. we're sort of half joking here. &gt;&gt; So given the links between the emotion &gt;&gt; So given the links between the emotion &gt;&gt; So given the links between the emotion system and sound and joining in system and sound and joining in system and sound and joining in sound, in sound, in sound, &gt;&gt; I mean, maybe this isn't too crazy an &gt;&gt; I mean, maybe this isn't too crazy an &gt;&gt; I mean, maybe this isn't too crazy an idea. Maybe it's crazy, but who cares? idea. Maybe it's crazy, but who cares? idea. Maybe it's crazy, but who cares? &gt;&gt; We have some advantages in science that &gt;&gt; We have some advantages in science that &gt;&gt; We have some advantages in science that we have a comfort with we have a comfort with we have a comfort with have with argumentation, you know, with have with argumentation, you know, with have with argumentation, you know, with disagreeing about things. but agreeing disagreeing about things. but agreeing disagreeing about things. but agreeing fundamentally that we're gonna go fundamentally that we're gonna go fundamentally that we're gonna go where the facts lead us. Do you know where the facts lead us. Do you know where the facts lead us. Do you know what I mean? So the disagreement is what I mean? So the disagreement is what I mean? So the disagreement is about what the facts are, but we agree about what the facts are, but we agree about what the facts are, but we agree that if we can come to agreement about that if we can come to agreement about that if we can come to agreement about facts, then we can proceed from there. facts, then we can proceed from there. facts, then we can proceed from there. But there's a feeling that I have come But there's a feeling that I have come But there's a feeling that I have come to appreciate maybe to appreciate maybe to appreciate maybe isn't present in other domains, other isn't present in other domains, other isn't present in other domains, other kind of kind of kind of you know academic domains or areas of you know academic domains or areas of you know academic domains or areas of the occupations that people have that the occupations that people have that the occupations that people have that you know may be a little different from you know may be a little different from you know may be a little different from what um what we have in science you know what um what we have in science you know what um what we have in science you know and I don't want to make science seem and I don't want to make science seem and I don't want to make science seem all perfect in all regards but I think all perfect in all regards but I think all perfect in all regards but I think there's a there's a sense of like, there's a there's a sense of like, there's a there's a sense of like, well, you may not want to hear that I well, you may not want to hear that I well, you may not want to hear that I think you're wrong, but we know that, think you're wrong, but we know that, think you're wrong, but we know that, you know, those kinds of things have to you know, those kinds of things have to you know, those kinds of things have to be said that you're going to have be said that you're going to have be said that you're going to have to defend your work in a peer review to defend your work in a peer review to defend your work in a peer review when you try to get your work when you try to get your work when you try to get your work published. You're going to have to deal published. You're going to have to deal published. You're going to have to deal with, you know, peerreview comments that with, you know, peerreview comments that with, you know, peerreview comments that you may not, you know, I certainly have you may not, you know, I certainly have you may not, you know, I certainly have had my moments where I've been like, had my moments where I've been like, had my moments where I've been like, [snorts] I cannot believe somebody [snorts] I cannot believe somebody [snorts] I cannot believe somebody thought that when I wrote this, you know thought that when I wrote this, you know thought that when I wrote this, you know what I mean? you know, but you go what I mean? you know, but you go what I mean? you know, but you go through that emotional period of time through that emotional period of time through that emotional period of time and you're like, "Oh, well, actually, and you're like, "Oh, well, actually, and you're like, "Oh, well, actually, it's kind of I can see how it's actually it's kind of I can see how it's actually it's kind of I can see how it's actually my fault for how I wrote it." You know, my fault for how I wrote it." You know, my fault for how I wrote it." You know, that it didn't actually say what I that it didn't actually say what I that it didn't actually say what I wanted or it didn't say didn't set up wanted or it didn't say didn't set up wanted or it didn't say didn't set up the reader to understand the point I was the reader to understand the point I was the reader to understand the point I was making. So, I need to fix this. And yes, making. So, I need to fix this. And yes, making. So, I need to fix this. And yes, you're right that there is a hole in the you're right that there is a hole in the you're right that there is a hole in the in the data here that it doesn't fully in the data here that it doesn't fully in the data here that it doesn't fully support the hypothesis the way I thought support the hypothesis the way I thought support the hypothesis the way I thought it did. And it's and that's okay. Like it did. And it's and that's okay. Like it did. And it's and that's okay. Like it's okay not to have the story it's okay not to have the story it's okay not to have the story complete. It's okay not to have every complete. It's okay not to have every complete. It's okay not to have every detail of it right. Just acknowledge detail of it right. Just acknowledge detail of it right. Just acknowledge that you don't, you know, acknowledge that you don't, you know, acknowledge that you don't, you know, acknowledge what you think the weaknesses are. And I what you think the weaknesses are. And I what you think the weaknesses are. And I kind of don't see people acknowledging I kind of don't see people acknowledging I kind of don't see people acknowledging weakness in let's say the political weakness in let's say the political weakness in let's say the political domain &gt;&gt; right now. like to acknowledge well you &gt;&gt; right now. like to acknowledge well you &gt;&gt; right now. like to acknowledge well you know I'd like I'd like [snorts] such and know I'd like I'd like [snorts] such and know I'd like I'd like [snorts] such and such a thing but I can see that there's such a thing but I can see that there's such a thing but I can see that there's that there's a counterargument to that there's a counterargument to that there's a counterargument to that how can I address that or should I how can I address that or should I how can I address that or should I change my mind change my mind change my mind &gt;&gt; yeah I think in science we have &gt;&gt; yeah I think in science we have &gt;&gt; yeah I think in science we have agreements on how to evaluate strength agreements on how to evaluate strength agreements on how to evaluate strength of evidence of evidence of evidence &gt;&gt; and um like we can't just have one data &gt;&gt; and um like we can't just have one data &gt;&gt; and um like we can't just have one data point and draw a conclusion from that um point and draw a conclusion from that um point and draw a conclusion from that um we won't convince anyone even if we're we won't convince anyone even if we're we won't convince anyone even if we're convinced and if we are we should check convinced and if we are we should check convinced and if we are we should check ourselves I do have a question about the auditory I do have a question about the auditory I do have a question about the auditory system which is a number of people including which is a number of people including which is a number of people including myself are obsessed with trying to find myself are obsessed with trying to find myself are obsessed with trying to find what is the optimal thing to listen to what is the optimal thing to listen to what is the optimal thing to listen to perhaps it's nothing perhaps it's nothing perhaps it's nothing &gt;&gt; in order to be able to focus &gt;&gt; in order to be able to focus &gt;&gt; in order to be able to focus &gt;&gt; and the data as I see them are basically &gt;&gt; and the data as I see them are basically &gt;&gt; and the data as I see them are basically pointing to silence pointing to silence pointing to silence &gt;&gt; is best and so I have a question about &gt;&gt; is best and so I have a question about &gt;&gt; is best and so I have a question about silence and the voice in our head silence and the voice in our head silence and the voice in our head &gt;&gt; I have a question about that Yeah, &gt;&gt; I have a question about that Yeah, &gt;&gt; I have a question about that Yeah, &gt;&gt; it's very clear &gt;&gt; it's very clear &gt;&gt; it's very clear that certain frequencies of sound that certain frequencies of sound that certain frequencies of sound actually sometimes listen to white noise. There sometimes listen to white noise. There sometimes listen to white noise. There are a number of companies now that put are a number of companies now that put are a number of companies now that put out free content um of it's not out free content um of it's not out free content um of it's not necessarily binaural beats, but necessarily binaural beats, but necessarily binaural beats, but different frequencies that oscillate different frequencies that oscillate different frequencies that oscillate &gt;&gt; could be totally placebo, &gt;&gt; could be totally placebo, &gt;&gt; could be totally placebo, &gt;&gt; but I don't think so because they &gt;&gt; but I don't think so because they &gt;&gt; but I don't think so because they referenced a number of studies. It looks referenced a number of studies. It looks referenced a number of studies. It looks like you can get some cognitive like you can get some cognitive like you can get some cognitive enhancement or focus enhancement and I enhancement or focus enhancement and I enhancement or focus enhancement and I use these. There's some great, you know, use these. There's some great, you know, use these. There's some great, you know, study with me study with me study with me &gt;&gt; uh channels online where you sit there &gt;&gt; uh channels online where you sit there &gt;&gt; uh channels online where you sit there and you work while they work. What and you work while they work. What and you work while they work. What are your thoughts on how on the use of are your thoughts on how on the use of are your thoughts on how on the use of sound as a way to change brain state? sound as a way to change brain state? sound as a way to change brain state? &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I want to back up on this &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I want to back up on this &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I want to back up on this question because I think you're asking a question because I think you're asking a question because I think you're asking a pretty deep question. One might wonder pretty deep question. One might wonder pretty deep question. One might wonder why would that matter? Like what is our why would that matter? Like what is our why would that matter? Like what is our what is actually going on in our what is actually going on in our what is actually going on in our brain that kind of pairing would brain that kind of pairing would brain that kind of pairing would have an effect? regardless of what might have an effect? regardless of what might have an effect? regardless of what might turn out to be sort of the best option. turn out to be sort of the best option. turn out to be sort of the best option. And so one theory that I like to think And so one theory that I like to think And so one theory that I like to think about a lot is a theory of thought and about a lot is a theory of thought and about a lot is a theory of thought and what is actually going on in our brains what is actually going on in our brains what is actually going on in our brains when we think. when we think. when we think. &gt;&gt; And this theory is that what goes on in &gt;&gt; And this theory is that what goes on in &gt;&gt; And this theory is that what goes on in our brains when we think might be that our brains when we think might be that our brains when we think might be that we're running simulations we're running simulations we're running simulations related to the thought using that related to the thought using that related to the thought using that sensory motor infrastructure of sensory motor infrastructure of sensory motor infrastructure of the brain. the brain. the brain. &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is &gt;&gt; Could you elaborate? So the theory is that like maybe when you think about a that like maybe when you think about a that like maybe when you think about a cat for example or you think the concept cat for example or you think the concept cat for example or you think the concept of a cat that the mental instantiation of a cat that the mental instantiation of a cat that the mental instantiation of that or the brain mechanism of that or the brain mechanism of that or the brain mechanism instantiation of having that thought is instantiation of having that thought is instantiation of having that thought is to run a little simulation and visual to run a little simulation and visual to run a little simulation and visual cortex that kind of includes what a cat cortex that kind of includes what a cat cortex that kind of includes what a cat looks like a simulation in auditory looks like a simulation in auditory looks like a simulation in auditory cortex that what does a cat sound like cortex that what does a cat sound like cortex that what does a cat sound like and as I'm telling you this I'm you know and as I'm telling you this I'm you know and as I'm telling you this I'm you know if you use the word cat um what color if you use the word cat um what color if you use the word cat um what color cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a cat are you thinking I'm thinking of a gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty gray cat, but I keep smelling kitty litter cuz my sister had cats and it litter cuz my sister had cats and it litter cuz my sister had cats and it drove me the smell of kitty litter is drove me the smell of kitty litter is drove me the smell of kitty litter is just so aversive to me. just so aversive to me. just so aversive to me. &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation &gt;&gt; Right. And so you had no hesitation in telling me the color and adding an in telling me the color and adding an in telling me the color and adding an additional sensory quality. Mhm. additional sensory quality. Mhm. additional sensory quality. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So that's a, you know, it's a bit of a &gt;&gt; So that's a, you know, it's a bit of a &gt;&gt; So that's a, you know, it's a bit of a just so story, but I think that it's a just so story, but I think that it's a just so story, but I think that it's a plausible possibility that that's in plausible possibility that that's in plausible possibility that that's in fact what's happening when we think. fact what's happening when we think. fact what's happening when we think. And, you know, some of what um kind of u And, you know, some of what um kind of u And, you know, some of what um kind of u tangentially supports this is that we tangentially supports this is that we tangentially supports this is that we have many more sensory areas of have many more sensory areas of have many more sensory areas of the brain than monkeys do, than you the brain than monkeys do, than you the brain than monkeys do, than you know, more distant mamalian uh relatives know, more distant mamalian uh relatives know, more distant mamalian uh relatives do. as if what might have happened to do. as if what might have happened to do. as if what might have happened to allow us to become so smart is to, you allow us to become so smart is to, you allow us to become so smart is to, you know, make extra copies of some of these know, make extra copies of some of these know, make extra copies of some of these sensory areas of the brain. And then sensory areas of the brain. And then sensory areas of the brain. And then when you have an extra copy, you're no when you have an extra copy, you're no when you have an extra copy, you're no longer so constrained, right? We don't longer so constrained, right? We don't longer so constrained, right? We don't really see or hear any better than really see or hear any better than really see or hear any better than monkeys do. So what's this extra tissue monkeys do. So what's this extra tissue monkeys do. So what's this extra tissue doing for us? possibility is that doing for us? possibility is that doing for us? possibility is that we're using it to generate these we're using it to generate these we're using it to generate these simulations and that running these simulations and that running these simulations and that running these simulations is kind of what thought is simulations is kind of what thought is simulations is kind of what thought is &gt;&gt; interesting. Is it um helpful? Is it &gt;&gt; interesting. Is it um helpful? Is it &gt;&gt; interesting. Is it um helpful? Is it adaptive? &gt;&gt; Well, it might just be the only game in &gt;&gt; Well, it might just be the only game in &gt;&gt; Well, it might just be the only game in town. It provides an explanation for why town. It provides an explanation for why town. It provides an explanation for why you might, you know, be you might, you know, be you might, you know, be driving on the freeway and having to driving on the freeway and having to driving on the freeway and having to merge into difficult traffic and telling merge into difficult traffic and telling merge into difficult traffic and telling your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. your passenger, "Okay, be quiet. I've gotta I gotta pay attention now. I've gotta I gotta pay attention now. I've gotta I gotta pay attention now. Like, why would speech impair you from Like, why would speech impair you from Like, why would speech impair you from visual motor visual motor visual motor &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of &gt;&gt; if it wasn't all part of a kind of cognitive system that's in cognitive system that's in cognitive system that's in operation? And maybe you need to shift operation? And maybe you need to shift operation? And maybe you need to shift some resources away from processing the some resources away from processing the some resources away from processing the conversation and towards some, you know, conversation and towards some, you know, conversation and towards some, you know, actually dealing with the here and now actually dealing with the here and now actually dealing with the here and now sensory motor task. I like this a lot sensory motor task. I like this a lot sensory motor task. I like this a lot and I want to continue down this thread and I want to continue down this thread and I want to continue down this thread because we've never talked about what because we've never talked about what because we've never talked about what thought is on this podcast and I've thought is on this podcast and I've thought is on this podcast and I've wondered like why is it that so many of wondered like why is it that so many of wondered like why is it that so many of our thoughts are incomplete sentences? our thoughts are incomplete sentences? our thoughts are incomplete sentences? They're so fractured. They're so fractured. They're so fractured. &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And if you really just track your thoughts if you really just track your thoughts if you really just track your thoughts for a moment, you realize they jump for a moment, you realize they jump for a moment, you realize they jump around &gt;&gt; even if they're around some coherent &gt;&gt; even if they're around some coherent &gt;&gt; even if they're around some coherent &gt;&gt; framework or subject. &gt;&gt; framework or subject. &gt;&gt; framework or subject. &gt;&gt; It's predictable. Like you can see the &gt;&gt; It's predictable. Like you can see the &gt;&gt; It's predictable. Like you can see the train of thought sometimes like they train of thought sometimes like they train of thought sometimes like they rarely jump completely in some totally rarely jump completely in some totally rarely jump completely in some totally new. &gt;&gt; Sorry I'm laughing. For some people they &gt;&gt; Sorry I'm laughing. For some people they &gt;&gt; Sorry I'm laughing. For some people they really do. really do. really do. &gt;&gt; Do they really? &gt;&gt; Do they really? &gt;&gt; Do they really? &gt;&gt; They do. They do. Sort of like the &gt;&gt; They do. They do. Sort of like the &gt;&gt; They do. They do. Sort of like the liinal state between awake and sleep. I liinal state between awake and sleep. I liinal state between awake and sleep. I like to lie there right as I'm waking up like to lie there right as I'm waking up like to lie there right as I'm waking up &gt;&gt; and think &gt;&gt; and think &gt;&gt; and think &gt;&gt; and try and stay on a thought thread &gt;&gt; and try and stay on a thought thread &gt;&gt; and try and stay on a thought thread and then I'll just chuckle to myself and then I'll just chuckle to myself and then I'll just chuckle to myself like 30 seconds later. It's some place like 30 seconds later. It's some place like 30 seconds later. It's some place completely because in that liinal state completely because in that liinal state completely because in that liinal state you're still in a pseudo dream uh state. you're still in a pseudo dream uh state. you're still in a pseudo dream uh state. One time in my class, one of my One time in my class, one of my One time in my class, one of my undergraduate classes, I um I asked undergraduate classes, I um I asked undergraduate classes, I um I asked people to try to um without thinking too people to try to um without thinking too people to try to um without thinking too much, come up with a word that was much, come up with a word that was much, come up with a word that was totally and completely unrelated to totally and completely unrelated to totally and completely unrelated to anything that we had just been talking anything that we had just been talking anything that we had just been talking about. &gt;&gt; I'm going to give you a moment, but not &gt;&gt; I'm going to give you a moment, but not &gt;&gt; I'm going to give you a moment, but not too long. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; It's really tough, &gt;&gt; It's really tough, &gt;&gt; It's really tough, &gt;&gt; isn't it? Hard. &gt;&gt; isn't it? Hard. &gt;&gt; isn't it? Hard. &gt;&gt; The first word that leapt to mind was &gt;&gt; The first word that leapt to mind was &gt;&gt; The first word that leapt to mind was cacophony. And it's like, no, that's cacophony. And it's like, no, that's cacophony. And it's like, no, that's directly in the framework of what directly in the framework of what directly in the framework of what we're talking about. I'm like, damn it. we're talking about. I'm like, damn it. we're talking about. I'm like, damn it. I And I looked at the paneling on I And I looked at the paneling on I And I looked at the paneling on the wall and I thought maybe it's the wall and I thought maybe it's the wall and I thought maybe it's something about and like now I could do something about and like now I could do something about and like now I could do it like I'd say like lacquer or it like I'd say like lacquer or it like I'd say like lacquer or something like that. something like that. something like that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But again, it's going to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. But again, it's going to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. But again, it's going to be related, right? related, right? related, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's really tough. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's really tough. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's really tough. &gt;&gt; And and you know, these are these are uh &gt;&gt; And and you know, these are these are uh &gt;&gt; And and you know, these are these are uh kids that probably have a 30,000word kids that probably have a 30,000word kids that probably have a 30,000word vocabulary, right? That's a typical vocabulary, right? That's a typical vocabulary, right? That's a typical vocabulary. Young brains. And I had like vocabulary. Young brains. And I had like vocabulary. Young brains. And I had like 15 students in the class. 15 students in the class. 15 students in the class. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. I think two of them came up with the I think two of them came up with the I think two of them came up with the word elephant and three of them came up word elephant and three of them came up word elephant and three of them came up with the word banana, you know, like with the word banana, you know, like with the word banana, you know, like they were clearly not random words. they were clearly not random words. they were clearly not random words. &gt;&gt; So, I think uh we're talking about &gt;&gt; So, I think uh we're talking about &gt;&gt; So, I think uh we're talking about something extremely important now that I something extremely important now that I something extremely important now that I like your thoughts on because this is like your thoughts on because this is like your thoughts on because this is really about how the brain works, right? really about how the brain works, right? really about how the brain works, right? And I love the auditory system and And I love the auditory system and And I love the auditory system and we'll get back to it, but it's part of we'll get back to it, but it's part of we'll get back to it, but it's part of this larger question of how our brains this larger question of how our brains this larger question of how our brains work. I'm asking about binaural beats or work. I'm asking about binaural beats or work. I'm asking about binaural beats or white noise or pink noise or brown white noise or pink noise or brown white noise or pink noise or brown noise. um in order to enhance focus. noise. um in order to enhance focus. noise. um in order to enhance focus. There's a lot of interest in that, but There's a lot of interest in that, but There's a lot of interest in that, but what we're really talking about is how what we're really talking about is how what we're really talking about is how what our thoughts, how we think, and how what our thoughts, how we think, and how what our thoughts, how we think, and how to anchor our thinking and align it with to anchor our thinking and align it with to anchor our thinking and align it with action. &gt;&gt; And so, I'm obsessed with this notion of &gt;&gt; And so, I'm obsessed with this notion of &gt;&gt; And so, I'm obsessed with this notion of attractor states. And the way I think attractor states. And the way I think attractor states. And the way I think about this, tell me, tell me if I have about this, tell me, tell me if I have about this, tell me, tell me if I have this wrong, is I think about brain this wrong, is I think about brain this wrong, is I think about brain states as very context dependent, states as very context dependent, states as very context dependent, especially nowadays with the amount of especially nowadays with the amount of especially nowadays with the amount of information we're being bombarded with information we're being bombarded with information we're being bombarded with through our phones. through our phones. through our phones. And because a walk to the from the car And because a walk to the from the car And because a walk to the from the car to your desk or a walk from the car to your desk or a walk from the car to your desk or a walk from the car to your first meeting is a very different your first meeting is a very different your first meeting is a very different experience with a phone than it was like experience with a phone than it was like experience with a phone than it was like 20 years ago. 20 years ago. 20 years ago. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; And people who are younger than me won't &gt;&gt; And people who are younger than me won't &gt;&gt; And people who are younger than me won't know what we're talking about. They're know what we're talking about. They're know what we're talking about. They're like, "What are you talking about? The like, "What are you talking about? The like, "What are you talking about? The you were always in comm." No, that's not you were always in comm." No, that's not you were always in comm." No, that's not how it was. how it was. how it was. &gt;&gt; But the way I think about &gt;&gt; But the way I think about &gt;&gt; But the way I think about &gt;&gt; the brain is that &gt;&gt; the brain is that &gt;&gt; the brain is that &gt;&gt; my thinking is more or less like a ball &gt;&gt; my thinking is more or less like a ball &gt;&gt; my thinking is more or less like a ball bearing on a flat surface. Mhm. bearing on a flat surface. Mhm. bearing on a flat surface. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And the more fatigued I am, the more &gt;&gt; And the more fatigued I am, the more &gt;&gt; And the more fatigued I am, the more unbalanced [clears throat] that surface unbalanced [clears throat] that surface unbalanced [clears throat] that surface is. But assuming I've slept well, and is. But assuming I've slept well, and is. But assuming I've slept well, and I'm hydrated, caffeinated, and I'm hydrated, caffeinated, and I'm hydrated, caffeinated, and satisfied, I don't have some like basic satisfied, I don't have some like basic satisfied, I don't have some like basic need like having to go to the bathroom need like having to go to the bathroom need like having to go to the bathroom or gnawing hunger or need for a or gnawing hunger or need for a or gnawing hunger or need for a coffee. I'm like a ball bearing on a coffee. I'm like a ball bearing on a coffee. I'm like a ball bearing on a flat surface flat surface flat surface &gt;&gt; and that flat surface is relatively &gt;&gt; and that flat surface is relatively &gt;&gt; and that flat surface is relatively stable. Now, as I move into something stable. Now, as I move into something stable. Now, as I move into something like a discussion of this podcast or um like a discussion of this podcast or um like a discussion of this podcast or um or I'm reading something, the or I'm reading something, the or I'm reading something, the dimples start to form on that surface. dimples start to form on that surface. dimples start to form on that surface. And so that ball bearing can rest, And so that ball bearing can rest, And so that ball bearing can rest, &gt;&gt; but you can still nudge it out pretty &gt;&gt; but you can still nudge it out pretty &gt;&gt; but you can still nudge it out pretty easily, &gt;&gt; but that as I go further and further &gt;&gt; but that as I go further and further &gt;&gt; but that as I go further and further into an activity, it becomes a trench into an activity, it becomes a trench into an activity, it becomes a trench and that ball bearing sinks to the and that ball bearing sinks to the and that ball bearing sinks to the bottom of that trench. Mh. bottom of that trench. Mh. bottom of that trench. Mh. &gt;&gt; And um Kristoff Caul who was here &gt;&gt; And um Kristoff Caul who was here &gt;&gt; And um Kristoff Caul who was here recently said, you know, the flow state recently said, you know, the flow state recently said, you know, the flow state that we that we all want so badly is that we that we all want so badly is that we that we all want so badly is where we actually forget about ourselves where we actually forget about ourselves where we actually forget about ourselves because we're so deeply in that state of because we're so deeply in that state of because we're so deeply in that state of doing. I think he's right. And I think doing. I think he's right. And I think doing. I think he's right. And I think that many people think that they have that many people think that they have that many people think that they have ADHD. Many people think that they can't ADHD. Many people think that they can't ADHD. Many people think that they can't concentrate. I actually believe there are some people I actually believe there are some people I actually believe there are some people with clinically diagnosible ADHD, but with clinically diagnosible ADHD, but with clinically diagnosible ADHD, but that most people are just not allowing that most people are just not allowing that most people are just not allowing themselves a narrow enough set of themselves a narrow enough set of themselves a narrow enough set of sensory inputs and context to drop into sensory inputs and context to drop into sensory inputs and context to drop into that trench. that trench. that trench. &gt;&gt; And yet it's the thing that feels so &gt;&gt; And yet it's the thing that feels so &gt;&gt; And yet it's the thing that feels so good &gt;&gt; when we're in it and when we emerge from &gt;&gt; when we're in it and when we emerge from &gt;&gt; when we're in it and when we emerge from it, we're like it, we're like it, we're like &gt;&gt; like that's what we're supposed to do. &gt;&gt; like that's what we're supposed to do. &gt;&gt; like that's what we're supposed to do. So what you described in the classroom So what you described in the classroom So what you described in the classroom where your students can't even where your students can't even where your students can't even come up with a word unrelated to the come up with a word unrelated to the come up with a word unrelated to the conversation is one of these attractor conversation is one of these attractor conversation is one of these attractor states. &gt;&gt; Is that is I mean where does that sit &gt;&gt; Is that is I mean where does that sit &gt;&gt; Is that is I mean where does that sit with you? Yeah, I think that I think with you? Yeah, I think that I think with you? Yeah, I think that I think that sounds good to me. And I think um I that sounds good to me. And I think um I that sounds good to me. And I think um I too share an interest in like how to get too share an interest in like how to get too share an interest in like how to get myself into that flow state myself into that flow state myself into that flow state &gt;&gt; and what to do when I have sort of &gt;&gt; and what to do when I have sort of &gt;&gt; and what to do when I have sort of bottomed out in like one particular like bottomed out in like one particular like bottomed out in like one particular like I get I might be in flow and making good I get I might be in flow and making good I get I might be in flow and making good progress on something and then I get progress on something and then I get progress on something and then I get stuck and I stop stuck and I stop stuck and I stop &gt;&gt; and I find that changing my immediate &gt;&gt; and I find that changing my immediate &gt;&gt; and I find that changing my immediate environment is a good way to get out of environment is a good way to get out of environment is a good way to get out of that little rut. Um, so for example, that little rut. Um, so for example, that little rut. Um, so for example, if I'm working on a difficult piece of if I'm working on a difficult piece of if I'm working on a difficult piece of writing, I might get to the end of what writing, I might get to the end of what writing, I might get to the end of what I can achieve in one particular cafe, I can achieve in one particular cafe, I can achieve in one particular cafe, but if I go to another cafe, but if I go to another cafe, but if I go to another cafe, &gt;&gt; you know, &gt;&gt; you know, &gt;&gt; you know, &gt;&gt; now this is a very smart strategy. &gt;&gt; now this is a very smart strategy. &gt;&gt; now this is a very smart strategy. Actually, uh, a neuroscientist whose Actually, uh, a neuroscientist whose Actually, uh, a neuroscientist whose work I really admire and uh, and I work I really admire and uh, and I work I really admire and uh, and I also really enjoy as a person is Mara also really enjoy as a person is Mara also really enjoy as a person is Mara Feller at UC Berkeley. And Feller at UC Berkeley. And Feller at UC Berkeley. And &gt;&gt; I think she was the one that told me &gt;&gt; I think she was the one that told me &gt;&gt; I think she was the one that told me that at scientific conferences which can that at scientific conferences which can that at scientific conferences which can go on for 2 or 3 days and sometimes the go on for 2 or 3 days and sometimes the go on for 2 or 3 days and sometimes the sessions are very long. You have sessions are very long. You have sessions are very long. You have morning, afternoon, evening sessions. morning, afternoon, evening sessions. morning, afternoon, evening sessions. It's like a it's a lot to pay It's like a it's a lot to pay It's like a it's a lot to pay attention to, lot of sitting. She would attention to, lot of sitting. She would attention to, lot of sitting. She would move seats move seats move seats &gt;&gt; around the um around the auditorium &gt;&gt; around the um around the auditorium &gt;&gt; around the um around the auditorium because she swore that it I think it was because she swore that it I think it was because she swore that it I think it was Mara. Mara, if it wasn't you, forgive Mara. Mara, if it wasn't you, forgive Mara. Mara, if it wasn't you, forgive me. um but I think it was Mara could she me. um but I think it was Mara could she me. um but I think it was Mara could she would move seats so that she could would move seats so that she could would move seats so that she could always anchor her attention always anchor her attention always anchor her attention &gt;&gt; uh for each talk or set of talks not &gt;&gt; uh for each talk or set of talks not &gt;&gt; uh for each talk or set of talks not necessarily &gt;&gt; you know moving every moment but every &gt;&gt; you know moving every moment but every &gt;&gt; you know moving every moment but every hour or so. Um I think this is every hour or so. Um I think this is every hour or so. Um I think this is absolutely right and so I wonder whether absolutely right and so I wonder whether absolutely right and so I wonder whether or not some of these effects of binaural or not some of these effects of binaural or not some of these effects of binaural beats or other frequencies improving beats or other frequencies improving beats or other frequencies improving focus &gt;&gt; has to do with just needing to fill the &gt;&gt; has to do with just needing to fill the &gt;&gt; has to do with just needing to fill the auditory sensory space. auditory sensory space. auditory sensory space. &gt;&gt; That could be &gt;&gt; That could be &gt;&gt; That could be &gt;&gt; like if I go I have this I work in my &gt;&gt; like if I go I have this I work in my &gt;&gt; like if I go I have this I work in my basement now. I've set up my basement as basement now. I've set up my basement as basement now. I've set up my basement as like the ideal work environment. No like the ideal work environment. No like the ideal work environment. No phones, no internet. phones, no internet. phones, no internet. &gt;&gt; Don't allow it. When I go down there, &gt;&gt; Don't allow it. When I go down there, &gt;&gt; Don't allow it. When I go down there, &gt;&gt; it's just me and my thoughts. &gt;&gt; it's just me and my thoughts. &gt;&gt; it's just me and my thoughts. &gt;&gt; I do allow some music, but when I get &gt;&gt; I do allow some music, but when I get &gt;&gt; I do allow some music, but when I get down there, the first 10, 15 minutes are down there, the first 10, 15 minutes are down there, the first 10, 15 minutes are excruciating. &gt;&gt; Like, you can hear every distracting &gt;&gt; Like, you can hear every distracting &gt;&gt; Like, you can hear every distracting thought. I can think of a million things thought. I can think of a million things thought. I can think of a million things that I would just pop to mind. But after that I would just pop to mind. But after that I would just pop to mind. But after about 10 15 minutes that all fades away about 10 15 minutes that all fades away about 10 15 minutes that all fades away and I can work down there for hours. and I can work down there for hours. and I can work down there for hours. Like no one can find me down there. I Like no one can find me down there. I Like no one can find me down there. I love it. Like I it I've had to create love it. Like I it I've had to create love it. Like I it I've had to create this physical space because nowadays this physical space because nowadays this physical space because nowadays there's just so much infiltration there's just so much infiltration there's just so much infiltration through devices. through devices. through devices. &gt;&gt; So I wonder, you know, for some people &gt;&gt; So I wonder, you know, for some people &gt;&gt; So I wonder, you know, for some people they think they can't focus, they think they can't focus, they think they can't focus, &gt;&gt; but that there's a there's a sensory &gt;&gt; but that there's a there's a sensory &gt;&gt; but that there's a there's a sensory space that needs filling. space that needs filling. space that needs filling. &gt;&gt; Yeah. They haven't maybe haven't figured &gt;&gt; Yeah. They haven't maybe haven't figured &gt;&gt; Yeah. They haven't maybe haven't figured out how they need to hack out how they need to hack out how they need to hack themselves. Like I and I think that the themselves. Like I and I think that the themselves. Like I and I think that the re one reason why I haven't specifically re one reason why I haven't specifically re one reason why I haven't specifically answered your question yet is because I answered your question yet is because I answered your question yet is because I think the answer may be specific to the think the answer may be specific to the think the answer may be specific to the individual. So for me for music, I like to listen to So for me for music, I like to listen to So for me for music, I like to listen to music while I work, but I do it music while I work, but I do it music while I work, but I do it sometimes but not other times. But as a sometimes but not other times. But as a sometimes but not other times. But as a musician myself, the music can't be too musician myself, the music can't be too musician myself, the music can't be too interesting to me. Like it has to be interesting to me. Like it has to be interesting to me. Like it has to be either stuff I know really well already either stuff I know really well already either stuff I know really well already so that it's not like grabbing my so that it's not like grabbing my so that it's not like grabbing my attention to actually listen to the song attention to actually listen to the song attention to actually listen to the song or it should be classical music or it should be classical music or it should be classical music or something that doesn't have lyrics something that doesn't have lyrics something that doesn't have lyrics &gt;&gt; so I don't have that language intrusion &gt;&gt; so I don't have that language intrusion &gt;&gt; so I don't have that language intrusion to my thoughts. to my thoughts. to my thoughts. &gt;&gt; Sometimes I find it useful to make a &gt;&gt; Sometimes I find it useful to make a &gt;&gt; Sometimes I find it useful to make a playlist for a particular project playlist for a particular project playlist for a particular project &gt;&gt; so that those songs start to become a &gt;&gt; so that those songs start to become a &gt;&gt; so that those songs start to become a cue &gt;&gt; mh &gt;&gt; mh &gt;&gt; mh &gt;&gt; for working on that project. Um, so I &gt;&gt; for working on that project. Um, so I &gt;&gt; for working on that project. Um, so I don't think there's going to be one don't think there's going to be one don't think there's going to be one answer that fits all circumstances, but answer that fits all circumstances, but answer that fits all circumstances, but to maybe have an understanding of what to maybe have an understanding of what to maybe have an understanding of what works for the particular person, the works for the particular person, the works for the particular person, the particular project. particular project. particular project. &gt;&gt; There's some very interesting data &gt;&gt; There's some very interesting data &gt;&gt; There's some very interesting data coming out of Mark Despazito's lab. coming out of Mark Despazito's lab. coming out of Mark Despazito's lab. We've had him on the podcast before We've had him on the podcast before We've had him on the podcast before about &gt;&gt; u dementia and ways to um improve &gt;&gt; u dementia and ways to um improve &gt;&gt; u dementia and ways to um improve working memory. working memory. working memory. &gt;&gt; Um, which seems to be more of a dopamine &gt;&gt; Um, which seems to be more of a dopamine &gt;&gt; Um, which seems to be more of a dopamine thing. Um, but [clears throat] if you thing. Um, but [clears throat] if you thing. Um, but [clears throat] if you can augment acetylcholine, you can augment acetylcholine, you can augment acetylcholine, you can improve attention. improve attention. improve attention. It's just it's just so clear like that It's just it's just so clear like that It's just it's just so clear like that these forbrain structures like nucleus these forbrain structures like nucleus these forbrain structures like nucleus basalis that are releasing acetylcholine basalis that are releasing acetylcholine basalis that are releasing acetylcholine they're necessary but not sufficient to they're necessary but not sufficient to they're necessary but not sufficient to establish an attentional spotlight. to establish an attentional spotlight. to establish an attentional spotlight. Um uh the reason I was going to you know Um uh the reason I was going to you know Um uh the reason I was going to you know mention in this context is you know that mention in this context is you know that mention in this context is you know that the cortex is you know rich with the cortex is you know rich with the cortex is you know rich with the nerve endings of these acetylcholine nerve endings of these acetylcholine nerve endings of these acetylcholine releasing neurons. The caliculus has releasing neurons. The caliculus has releasing neurons. The caliculus has acetylcholine input and it seems like acetylcholine input and it seems like acetylcholine input and it seems like any sensor multi-ensory area of the any sensor multi-ensory area of the any sensor multi-ensory area of the brain where you need to integrate vision brain where you need to integrate vision brain where you need to integrate vision and sound and context and thinking and sound and context and thinking and sound and context and thinking and all this stuff and intention and action. all this stuff and intention and action. all this stuff and intention and action. You have norepinephrine to raise overall You have norepinephrine to raise overall You have norepinephrine to raise overall alertness in the brain and body. That alertness in the brain and body. That alertness in the brain and body. That seems to be its general function. seems to be its general function. seems to be its general function. Dopamine does many different things in Dopamine does many different things in Dopamine does many different things in different areas as you know. But it different areas as you know. But it different areas as you know. But it seems like acetylcholine is the thing seems like acetylcholine is the thing seems like acetylcholine is the thing that really creates this ability that really creates this ability that really creates this ability for attentional spotlighting that being for attentional spotlighting that being for attentional spotlighting that being able to anchor one's thoughts and able to anchor one's thoughts and able to anchor one's thoughts and actions towards a specific set of actions towards a specific set of actions towards a specific set of sensory combinations. And so when we sensory combinations. And so when we sensory combinations. And so when we talk about listening to music or not talk about listening to music or not talk about listening to music or not listening to music or um listening to music or um listening to music or um &gt;&gt; one particular space or another space &gt;&gt; one particular space or another space &gt;&gt; one particular space or another space that one works in I think um so much that one works in I think um so much that one works in I think um so much of it is trying to uh you know we're of it is trying to uh you know we're of it is trying to uh you know we're trying to create these spheres of trying to create these spheres of trying to create these spheres of attention that are very compact. Um, and attention that are very compact. Um, and attention that are very compact. Um, and I don't think that people really I don't think that people really I don't think that people really appreciate just how hard that problem appreciate just how hard that problem appreciate just how hard that problem becomes when you take a device. I'm not becomes when you take a device. I'm not becomes when you take a device. I'm not anti-phones. And and you're anti-phones. And and you're anti-phones. And and you're bringing in another sphere of what bringing in another sphere of what bringing in another sphere of what 25,000 different spheres of attention 25,000 different spheres of attention 25,000 different spheres of attention that you can scroll through. It makes that you can scroll through. It makes that you can scroll through. It makes perfect sense why we wouldn't be able to perfect sense why we wouldn't be able to perfect sense why we wouldn't be able to focus because acetylcholine is like a focus because acetylcholine is like a focus because acetylcholine is like a resource that we spend out and it can be resource that we spend out and it can be resource that we spend out and it can be replenished in sleep. replenished in sleep. replenished in sleep. &gt;&gt; Mhm. You said you'll hit a flow state or &gt;&gt; Mhm. You said you'll hit a flow state or &gt;&gt; Mhm. You said you'll hit a flow state or a focus state and then we have to switch a focus state and then we have to switch a focus state and then we have to switch &gt;&gt; or you hit a wall and it's it I feel &gt;&gt; or you hit a wall and it's it I feel &gt;&gt; or you hit a wall and it's it I feel like it's a currency. like it's a currency. like it's a currency. &gt;&gt; It's not something that we should be &gt;&gt; It's not something that we should be &gt;&gt; It's not something that we should be able to just use, you know, infinitum. able to just use, you know, infinitum. able to just use, you know, infinitum. &gt;&gt; So I think a theme of some of your &gt;&gt; So I think a theme of some of your &gt;&gt; So I think a theme of some of your podcast episodes involves you know um podcast episodes involves you know um podcast episodes involves you know um physical exercise and workouts and you physical exercise and workouts and you physical exercise and workouts and you know what's the best routine for this know what's the best routine for this know what's the best routine for this that or the other aspect of the that or the other aspect of the that or the other aspect of the workout. Um, and generally interval workout. Um, and generally interval workout. Um, and generally interval training I think comes up as a pretty training I think comes up as a pretty training I think comes up as a pretty [clears throat] effective strategy. I [clears throat] effective strategy. I [clears throat] effective strategy. I sometimes think about that in the sometimes think about that in the sometimes think about that in the context of more mental work context of more mental work context of more mental work &gt;&gt; because I have not had good luck &gt;&gt; because I have not had good luck &gt;&gt; because I have not had good luck screening out all the distractions to screening out all the distractions to screening out all the distractions to get going on get going on get going on deep writing. For me, it's more like deep writing. For me, it's more like deep writing. For me, it's more like I can push out a sentence and that's so I can push out a sentence and that's so I can push out a sentence and that's so effortful that then I need to take a effortful that then I need to take a effortful that then I need to take a break. Oh, well, I feel much better now break. Oh, well, I feel much better now break. Oh, well, I feel much better now because um well, it I think this is because um well, it I think this is because um well, it I think this is where you're going. You may find comfort where you're going. You may find comfort where you're going. You may find comfort in the fact that we've had some just in the fact that we've had some just in the fact that we've had some just phenomenal uh physical coaches on here. phenomenal uh physical coaches on here. phenomenal uh physical coaches on here. I mean people are degreed in um I mean people are degreed in um I mean people are degreed in um physiology and teach super high physiology and teach super high physiology and teach super high level athletes level athletes level athletes &gt;&gt; and more than one of them has said &gt;&gt; and more than one of them has said &gt;&gt; and more than one of them has said &gt;&gt; that the attention span &gt;&gt; that the attention span &gt;&gt; that the attention span &gt;&gt; of the athlete in terms of ability to &gt;&gt; of the athlete in terms of ability to &gt;&gt; of the athlete in terms of ability to &gt;&gt; focus on cognitive information tutorial &gt;&gt; focus on cognitive information tutorial &gt;&gt; focus on cognitive information tutorial and learning even conversation and learning even conversation and learning even conversation &gt;&gt; directly maps onto the duration of their &gt;&gt; directly maps onto the duration of their &gt;&gt; directly maps onto the duration of their event &gt;&gt; like the sprinters can pay attention for &gt;&gt; like the sprinters can pay attention for &gt;&gt; like the sprinters can pay attention for about the duration about the duration about the duration &gt;&gt; about 10 seconds Yeah. Well, for the 100 &gt;&gt; about 10 seconds Yeah. Well, for the 100 &gt;&gt; about 10 seconds Yeah. Well, for the 100 meter, right? You know, um, but they can meter, right? You know, um, but they can meter, right? You know, um, but they can repeat that. repeat that. repeat that. &gt;&gt; Cuz the sprinter will sprint and then &gt;&gt; Cuz the sprinter will sprint and then &gt;&gt; Cuz the sprinter will sprint and then walk and then repeat. Right. Exactly. walk and then repeat. Right. Exactly. walk and then repeat. Right. Exactly. So, it's so it's like I'll write a So, it's so it's like I'll write a So, it's so it's like I'll write a sentence, then I'll check one new site, sentence, then I'll check one new site, sentence, then I'll check one new site, then I'll write another sentence, and then I'll write another sentence, and then I'll write another sentence, and I'll check another new site. And if I I'll check another new site. And if I I'll check another new site. And if I try to just write one sentence, and then try to just write one sentence, and then try to just write one sentence, and then another sentence, and then another sentence, and then another sentence, and then another sentence. I get frustrated with myself. sentence. I get frustrated with myself. sentence. I get frustrated with myself. It seems like it's I don't know. I can't It seems like it's I don't know. I can't It seems like it's I don't know. I can't I can't necessarily do it. Sometimes I can't necessarily do it. Sometimes I can't necessarily do it. Sometimes I can, but I've let go of working can, but I've let go of working can, but I've let go of working efficiently as a goal in and of itself. efficiently as a goal in and of itself. efficiently as a goal in and of itself. &gt;&gt; Was it always the case or do you think &gt;&gt; Was it always the case or do you think &gt;&gt; Was it always the case or do you think the advent of uh phones has made it the advent of uh phones has made it the advent of uh phones has made it such that you have this sort of um such that you have this sort of um such that you have this sort of um step function? step function? step function? &gt;&gt; I've always had a problem with the &gt;&gt; I've always had a problem with the &gt;&gt; I've always had a problem with the internet. [laughter] internet. [laughter] internet. [laughter] &gt;&gt; The phone is just the way in. But um uh &gt;&gt; The phone is just the way in. But um uh &gt;&gt; The phone is just the way in. But um uh the phone actually can be helpful to me the phone actually can be helpful to me the phone actually can be helpful to me because I can because I can because I can &gt;&gt; I can close all the tabs on my laptop &gt;&gt; I can close all the tabs on my laptop &gt;&gt; I can close all the tabs on my laptop &gt;&gt; and just have my phone be the way that I &gt;&gt; and just have my phone be the way that I &gt;&gt; and just have my phone be the way that I access the internet, for example. And access the internet, for example. And access the internet, for example. And that allows for like a kind of a mental that allows for like a kind of a mental that allows for like a kind of a mental and physical separation where I can kind and physical separation where I can kind and physical separation where I can kind of be like, "Okay, now I'm doing this. of be like, "Okay, now I'm doing this. of be like, "Okay, now I'm doing this. Okay, now I'm doing that." Um and keep Okay, now I'm doing that." Um and keep Okay, now I'm doing that." Um and keep them keep them kind of separated. I'd them keep them kind of separated. I'd them keep them kind of separated. I'd like to take a quick break and like to take a quick break and like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. &gt;&gt; I love that you're sharing this. Many &gt;&gt; I love that you're sharing this. Many &gt;&gt; I love that you're sharing this. Many people will um find comfort in hearing people will um find comfort in hearing people will um find comfort in hearing that. You know, my podcast producer uh that. You know, my podcast producer uh that. You know, my podcast producer uh Rob Moore, he's done multiple triathlons Rob Moore, he's done multiple triathlons Rob Moore, he's done multiple triathlons and he's an endurance guy. Um at and he's an endurance guy. Um at and he's an endurance guy. Um at one point in his past, he was like one point in his past, he was like one point in his past, he was like really he had carried a lot more muscle. really he had carried a lot more muscle. really he had carried a lot more muscle. He's still very like fit and strong, but He's still very like fit and strong, but He's still very like fit and strong, but he shifted over to endurance events. And he shifted over to endurance events. And he shifted over to endurance events. And this guy can work this guy can work this guy can work &gt;&gt; like nobody's business. Can work for &gt;&gt; like nobody's business. Can work for &gt;&gt; like nobody's business. Can work for hours and hours and hours and hours. And hours and hours and hours and hours. And hours and hours and hours and hours. And I feel like that's how I was in graduate I feel like that's how I was in graduate I feel like that's how I was in graduate school and as opposed to doc. school and as opposed to doc. school and as opposed to doc. I suppose I'm more of an endurance I suppose I'm more of an endurance I suppose I'm more of an endurance athlete with my mental work. I think athlete with my mental work. I think athlete with my mental work. I think maybe we should start thinking about maybe we should start thinking about maybe we should start thinking about cognition in these terms. Um because cognition in these terms. Um because cognition in these terms. Um because after all, we're not just two people after all, we're not just two people after all, we're not just two people talking about work habits. talking about work habits. talking about work habits. &gt;&gt; Um you're a neuroscientist and you study &gt;&gt; Um you're a neuroscientist and you study &gt;&gt; Um you're a neuroscientist and you study sensory integration and brain states and sensory integration and brain states and sensory integration and brain states and I still consider myself a I still consider myself a I still consider myself a neuroscientist even though I haven't neuroscientist even though I haven't neuroscientist even though I haven't gotten my hands dirty in the lab in a gotten my hands dirty in the lab in a gotten my hands dirty in the lab in a while. Um, while. Um, while. Um, I think this is very important because I think this is very important because I think this is very important because I think people uh flagagillate themselves think people uh flagagillate themselves think people uh flagagillate themselves over the fact that they couldn't pay over the fact that they couldn't pay over the fact that they couldn't pay attention to write one paragraph. Um, attention to write one paragraph. Um, attention to write one paragraph. Um, and they think that therefore that means and they think that therefore that means and they think that therefore that means they shouldn't write or that they can't they shouldn't write or that they can't they shouldn't write or that they can't write more than one paragraph, but they write more than one paragraph, but they write more than one paragraph, but they need to sounds like they need to create need to sounds like they need to create need to sounds like they need to create a system. a system. a system. &gt;&gt; I come out of the little the little mini &gt;&gt; I come out of the little the little mini &gt;&gt; I come out of the little the little mini internet break knowing what the next internet break knowing what the next internet break knowing what the next sentence needs to say. sentence needs to say. sentence needs to say. &gt;&gt; Interesting. So you're really an like an &gt;&gt; Interesting. So you're really an like an &gt;&gt; Interesting. So you're really an like an interval athlete when it comes to mental interval athlete when it comes to mental interval athlete when it comes to mental work &gt;&gt; with the hard stuff. With the easy &gt;&gt; with the hard stuff. With the easy &gt;&gt; with the hard stuff. With the easy stuff, I can just, you know, do it stuff, I can just, you know, do it stuff, I can just, you know, do it right. [clears throat] right. [clears throat] right. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; But it's this it's this sense of &gt;&gt; But it's this it's this sense of &gt;&gt; But it's this it's this sense of effortful cognition &gt;&gt; that takes its own time and it just &gt;&gt; that takes its own time and it just &gt;&gt; that takes its own time and it just takes its time takes its time takes its time &gt;&gt; and I don't control that. I do try to &gt;&gt; and I don't control that. I do try to &gt;&gt; and I don't control that. I do try to set myself up to allow the mental work set myself up to allow the mental work set myself up to allow the mental work to happen when I'm in the shower or in to happen when I'm in the shower or in to happen when I'm in the shower or in the car or whatever. So, for example, if the car or whatever. So, for example, if the car or whatever. So, for example, if I'm going to work on a grant application I'm going to work on a grant application I'm going to work on a grant application with somebody and we're sharing, you with somebody and we're sharing, you with somebody and we're sharing, you know, the writing and I know I can't know, the writing and I know I can't know, the writing and I know I can't start until I've had a conversation with start until I've had a conversation with start until I've had a conversation with the collaborator about who's doing what the collaborator about who's doing what the collaborator about who's doing what and what we think this grant is going to and what we think this grant is going to and what we think this grant is going to be about, you know, I might be about, you know, I might be about, you know, I might let that, you know, set up that meeting let that, you know, set up that meeting let that, you know, set up that meeting when there's going to be downtime when there's going to be downtime when there's going to be downtime afterwards. I did this just yesterday. I afterwards. I did this just yesterday. I afterwards. I did this just yesterday. I had a meeting yesterday morning knowing had a meeting yesterday morning knowing had a meeting yesterday morning knowing that then I was going to be on an that then I was going to be on an that then I was going to be on an airplane for quite a while knowing that airplane for quite a while knowing that airplane for quite a while knowing that without my having to do anything about without my having to do anything about without my having to do anything about it, the ideas are going to marinate. it, the ideas are going to marinate. it, the ideas are going to marinate. &gt;&gt; They're going to stuff is going to be &gt;&gt; They're going to stuff is going to be &gt;&gt; They're going to stuff is going to be happening that I'm not aware of and that happening that I'm not aware of and that happening that I'm not aware of and that when I come out of that, I'll probably when I come out of that, I'll probably when I come out of that, I'll probably know what I want at least the first know what I want at least the first know what I want at least the first couple of sentences to say. couple of sentences to say. couple of sentences to say. &gt;&gt; Yeah. you trust the uh the sort of um &gt;&gt; Yeah. you trust the uh the sort of um &gt;&gt; Yeah. you trust the uh the sort of um the process of a brain state shifting the process of a brain state shifting the process of a brain state shifting back and forth. You don't you don't back and forth. You don't you don't back and forth. You don't you don't fight it. You trust it. fight it. You trust it. fight it. You trust it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I have to. I mean, I don't see any &gt;&gt; Yeah, I have to. I mean, I don't see any &gt;&gt; Yeah, I have to. I mean, I don't see any other way to be to do it. But I think other way to be to do it. But I think other way to be to do it. But I think it's a little like, you know, you need it's a little like, you know, you need it's a little like, you know, you need rest and recovery for physical exercise. rest and recovery for physical exercise. rest and recovery for physical exercise. And honestly, it's not like the brain And honestly, it's not like the brain And honestly, it's not like the brain and the and muscles are all that and the and muscles are all that and the and muscles are all that different from each other. Right. Well, different from each other. Right. Well, different from each other. Right. Well, I always think of all nerve action as I always think of all nerve action as I always think of all nerve action as motor and uh we could talk about that. I motor and uh we could talk about that. I motor and uh we could talk about that. I mean Sharington said right the final mean Sharington said right the final mean Sharington said right the final common path the Nobel Prize winner common path the Nobel Prize winner common path the Nobel Prize winner sharing the final common path is sharing the final common path is sharing the final common path is movement. I mean that's what we evolved movement. I mean that's what we evolved movement. I mean that's what we evolved to do first and to do first and to do first and &gt;&gt; and thinking is a form of movement. It &gt;&gt; and thinking is a form of movement. It &gt;&gt; and thinking is a form of movement. It is hard for people to grasp sometimes is hard for people to grasp sometimes is hard for people to grasp sometimes but um and people perhaps can grasp it but um and people perhaps can grasp it but um and people perhaps can grasp it more easily in the context of songs. more easily in the context of songs. more easily in the context of songs. Certain songs sound like they're moving Certain songs sound like they're moving Certain songs sound like they're moving forward like it feels like a physical forward like it feels like a physical forward like it feels like a physical progression. They make you want to move, progression. They make you want to move, progression. They make you want to move, right? they actually inspire movement. right? they actually inspire movement. right? they actually inspire movement. Um, actually there are very few sounds Um, actually there are very few sounds Um, actually there are very few sounds that inspire stillness. They're they that inspire stillness. They're they that inspire stillness. They're they tend to be the, you know, slow oscilly tend to be the, you know, slow oscilly tend to be the, you know, slow oscilly sounds, ocean waves, things that don't sounds, ocean waves, things that don't sounds, ocean waves, things that don't have a structure, right? have a structure, right? have a structure, right? &gt;&gt; They're very fractal and but like to the &gt;&gt; They're very fractal and but like to the &gt;&gt; They're very fractal and but like to the point where you don't see that point where you don't see that point where you don't see that fractal structure. It just kind of fractal structure. It just kind of fractal structure. It just kind of breaks up and then your mind just goes breaks up and then your mind just goes breaks up and then your mind just goes into drift. the only other person into drift. the only other person into drift. the only other person I've ever met who um has described I've ever met who um has described I've ever met who um has described embracing their mental process the same embracing their mental process the same embracing their mental process the same way that you have is uh my good friend way that you have is uh my good friend way that you have is uh my good friend and the you know he's this like and the you know he's this like and the you know he's this like worldrenowned producer Rick Rubin who um worldrenowned producer Rick Rubin who um worldrenowned producer Rick Rubin who um he just trusts that there are certain he just trusts that there are certain he just trusts that there are certain times a day when things are going to times a day when things are going to times a day when things are going to come to him that certain things aren't come to him that certain things aren't come to him that certain things aren't ready and they just need to marinate in ready and they just need to marinate in ready and they just need to marinate in sleep or in dreams and doesn't even sleep or in dreams and doesn't even sleep or in dreams and doesn't even really try and assign it to sleep and really try and assign it to sleep and really try and assign it to sleep and dreams just understands the process dreams just understands the process dreams just understands the process it eventually is going to emerge he's it eventually is going to emerge he's it eventually is going to emerge he's not like why can't I get this thing out. not like why can't I get this thing out. not like why can't I get this thing out. And so he's very much in flow with And so he's very much in flow with And so he's very much in flow with his own, you know, peaks and valleys and his own, you know, peaks and valleys and his own, you know, peaks and valleys and attention. &gt;&gt; Being blocked can mean you don't know &gt;&gt; Being blocked can mean you don't know &gt;&gt; Being blocked can mean you don't know yet what needs to come next. yet what needs to come next. yet what needs to come next. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. So important for people to &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. So important for people to &gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. So important for people to hear because I think most everyone is hear because I think most everyone is hear because I think most everyone is trying to drop into that deep trench trying to drop into that deep trench trying to drop into that deep trench attractor state as quickly as possible, attractor state as quickly as possible, attractor state as quickly as possible, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And yet there are ways that we can do &gt;&gt; And yet there are ways that we can do &gt;&gt; And yet there are ways that we can do that. And maybe we talk about that for a that. And maybe we talk about that for a that. And maybe we talk about that for a few moments. I um I'd be remiss if I few moments. I um I'd be remiss if I few moments. I um I'd be remiss if I didn't um ask about your experience as a didn't um ask about your experience as a didn't um ask about your experience as a musician. What instrument do you play? musician. What instrument do you play? musician. What instrument do you play? &gt;&gt; Well, I started off with flute. Um you &gt;&gt; Well, I started off with flute. Um you &gt;&gt; Well, I started off with flute. Um you know, starting in fifth grade. Uh now I know, starting in fifth grade. Uh now I know, starting in fifth grade. Uh now I play the banjo and I sing. play the banjo and I sing. play the banjo and I sing. &gt;&gt; Nice. When you're doing that, do you &gt;&gt; Nice. When you're doing that, do you &gt;&gt; Nice. When you're doing that, do you find that you can your attention is find that you can your attention is find that you can your attention is anchored for the duration of the anchored for the duration of the anchored for the duration of the performance or practice? performance or practice? performance or practice? &gt;&gt; Yes. Especially when performing, there's &gt;&gt; Yes. Especially when performing, there's &gt;&gt; Yes. Especially when performing, there's a certain um like I feel that the a certain um like I feel that the a certain um like I feel that the singing in particular can come out singing in particular can come out singing in particular can come out better in performance than it does in better in performance than it does in better in performance than it does in practice. &gt;&gt; Not always, unfortunately. The more &gt;&gt; Not always, unfortunately. The more &gt;&gt; Not always, unfortunately. The more technically challenging, you know, technically challenging, you know, technically challenging, you know, playing with the banjo is a little playing with the banjo is a little playing with the banjo is a little harder. You know, that the harder. You know, that the harder. You know, that the adrenaline helps with the singing and adrenaline helps with the singing and adrenaline helps with the singing and hurts with the banjo, let's put it that hurts with the banjo, let's put it that hurts with the banjo, let's put it that way. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Because adrenaline it was what this like &gt;&gt; Because adrenaline it was what this like &gt;&gt; Because adrenaline it was what this like inverted U-shaped thing. Like at very inverted U-shaped thing. Like at very inverted U-shaped thing. Like at very low levels, we can't focus. At higher low levels, we can't focus. At higher low levels, we can't focus. At higher levels we can focus and it gets too high levels we can focus and it gets too high levels we can focus and it gets too high we're discombobulated. we're discombobulated. we're discombobulated. &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. Right. I mean &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. Right. I mean &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. Right. I mean it's just the shaking of the fingers it's just the shaking of the fingers it's just the shaking of the fingers that can be problematic. [clears throat] that can be problematic. [clears throat] that can be problematic. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; But the other problem is, you know, from &gt;&gt; But the other problem is, you know, from &gt;&gt; But the other problem is, you know, from an attention music performance an attention music performance an attention music performance standpoint, I would much prefer to sing standpoint, I would much prefer to sing standpoint, I would much prefer to sing a given song only once in a rehearsal a given song only once in a rehearsal a given song only once in a rehearsal than to go over it more than once than to go over it more than once than to go over it more than once because I can't remember the words the because I can't remember the words the because I can't remember the words the second time through. second time through. second time through. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; And I think it's this mental checklist &gt;&gt; And I think it's this mental checklist &gt;&gt; And I think it's this mental checklist of I already did I already sing that? I of I already did I already sing that? I of I already did I already sing that? I remember sing I remember singing that remember sing I remember singing that remember sing I remember singing that but no wait a sec but now I have to sing but no wait a sec but now I have to sing but no wait a sec but now I have to sing it again you know and just kind of it again you know and just kind of it again you know and just kind of keeping track of where I'm at um gets keeping track of where I'm at um gets keeping track of where I'm at um gets harder the second time through. harder the second time through. harder the second time through. &gt;&gt; Pressure is an interesting um thing to &gt;&gt; Pressure is an interesting um thing to &gt;&gt; Pressure is an interesting um thing to explore in this context of brain explore in this context of brain explore in this context of brain states because uh it sounds like you've states because uh it sounds like you've states because uh it sounds like you've embraced this kind of oscilly flow of embraced this kind of oscilly flow of embraced this kind of oscilly flow of your attention like in one context it your attention like in one context it your attention like in one context it works this way and you're not pressuring works this way and you're not pressuring works this way and you're not pressuring yourself to do something. There was a yourself to do something. There was a yourself to do something. There was a really interesting paper recently about really interesting paper recently about really interesting paper recently about the neural basis of choking and not the neural basis of choking and not the neural basis of choking and not uh not physically choking but when um uh not physically choking but when um uh not physically choking but when um something really critical is on the line something really critical is on the line something really critical is on the line what happens. Did you see that paper? I what happens. Did you see that paper? I what happens. Did you see that paper? I thought &gt;&gt; I have not but like &gt;&gt; I have not but like &gt;&gt; I have not but like &gt;&gt; it's really cool. They they record &gt;&gt; it's really cool. They they record &gt;&gt; it's really cool. They they record from motor cortex from motor cortex from motor cortex &gt;&gt; and a bunch of other areas. But the &gt;&gt; and a bunch of other areas. But the &gt;&gt; and a bunch of other areas. But the basic finding is that um basic finding is that um basic finding is that um &gt;&gt; if there's the potential for a low &gt;&gt; if there's the potential for a low &gt;&gt; if there's the potential for a low payoff if you get something right. Let's payoff if you get something right. Let's payoff if you get something right. Let's just say it's like throwing darts, which just say it's like throwing darts, which just say it's like throwing darts, which the analogous experiment would be like the analogous experiment would be like the analogous experiment would be like throwing darts. You say, "Well, let's throwing darts. You say, "Well, let's throwing darts. You say, "Well, let's say if you get on the dart board, you say if you get on the dart board, you say if you get on the dart board, you get a dollar." Um, if you get close get a dollar." Um, if you get close get a dollar." Um, if you get close within a certain distance of the within a certain distance of the within a certain distance of the bullseye, you get, I don't know, $1,000. bullseye, you get, I don't know, $1,000. bullseye, you get, I don't know, $1,000. Pretty good. Um, if you bullseye, Pretty good. Um, if you bullseye, Pretty good. Um, if you bullseye, &gt;&gt; you get $10 million. What ends up &gt;&gt; you get $10 million. What ends up &gt;&gt; you get $10 million. What ends up happening is that the performance on the happening is that the performance on the happening is that the performance on the high stakes condition is always worse, high stakes condition is always worse, high stakes condition is always worse, but just in terms of just even the basic but just in terms of just even the basic but just in terms of just even the basic mechanics. Yeah. mechanics. Yeah. mechanics. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And so choking turns out to be a &gt;&gt; And so choking turns out to be a &gt;&gt; And so choking turns out to be a recruitment of too many motor units. You recruitment of too many motor units. You recruitment of too many motor units. You basically you overinvest motor effort basically you overinvest motor effort basically you overinvest motor effort &gt;&gt; as opposed to staying chill and staying &gt;&gt; as opposed to staying chill and staying &gt;&gt; as opposed to staying chill and staying in the zone where you still might not in the zone where you still might not in the zone where you still might not bullseye. This wasn't the exact bullseye. This wasn't the exact bullseye. This wasn't the exact experiment but again it's analogous to experiment but again it's analogous to experiment but again it's analogous to what they really did it. But you what they really did it. But you what they really did it. But you stand a much greater chance if you stay stand a much greater chance if you stay stand a much greater chance if you stay within the your ability. You already within the your ability. You already within the your ability. You already know how to do this thing. Um, and know how to do this thing. Um, and know how to do this thing. Um, and subjects choke when the stakes go way up subjects choke when the stakes go way up subjects choke when the stakes go way up because they just overinvest too much because they just overinvest too much because they just overinvest too much motor activity. motor activity. motor activity. &gt;&gt; Perfectionism. &gt;&gt; Perfectionism. &gt;&gt; Perfectionism. &gt;&gt; It's a trap. &gt;&gt; It's a trap. &gt;&gt; It's a trap. &gt;&gt; You have to almost mentally convince &gt;&gt; You have to almost mentally convince &gt;&gt; You have to almost mentally convince yourself that the stakes are lower, but yourself that the stakes are lower, but yourself that the stakes are lower, but you can't really lie to yourself. you can't really lie to yourself. you can't really lie to yourself. Anyway, it's pretty interesting. It's Anyway, it's pretty interesting. It's Anyway, it's pretty interesting. It's pretty interesting. I love that pretty interesting. I love that pretty interesting. I love that we're talking about brain states and we're talking about brain states and we're talking about brain states and sensory inputs. In this case, it's sensory inputs. In this case, it's sensory inputs. In this case, it's knowledge about outcomes, uh, potential knowledge about outcomes, uh, potential knowledge about outcomes, uh, potential outcomes. I want to talk about chickens. outcomes. I want to talk about chickens. outcomes. I want to talk about chickens. Yes, &gt;&gt; you have chickens. &gt;&gt; you have chickens. &gt;&gt; you have chickens. &gt;&gt; I do. &gt;&gt; I do. &gt;&gt; I do. &gt;&gt; And so, first I'll ask you about &gt;&gt; And so, first I'll ask you about &gt;&gt; And so, first I'll ask you about chickens and what you find so chickens and what you find so chickens and what you find so interesting about them. And then I interesting about them. And then I interesting about them. And then I want your thoughts about a really wild want your thoughts about a really wild want your thoughts about a really wild finding about chickens and vision wild finding about chickens and vision wild finding about chickens and vision and attention. and attention. and attention. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; That anyone who's ever raised chickens &gt;&gt; That anyone who's ever raised chickens &gt;&gt; That anyone who's ever raised chickens on a farm on a farm on a farm &gt;&gt; probably knows, but only a couple of &gt;&gt; probably knows, but only a couple of &gt;&gt; probably knows, but only a couple of neuroscientists know. You'll probably neuroscientists know. You'll probably neuroscientists know. You'll probably know it, but anyway. What kind of know it, but anyway. What kind of know it, but anyway. What kind of chickens do you have? chickens do you have? chickens do you have? &gt;&gt; I have banttom meal flurs. So, banttom &gt;&gt; I have banttom meal flurs. So, banttom &gt;&gt; I have banttom meal flurs. So, banttom is little guys. is little guys. is little guys. &gt;&gt; They're little guys. Yeah. &gt;&gt; They're little guys. Yeah. &gt;&gt; They're little guys. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Meal flurs. &gt;&gt; Meal flurs. &gt;&gt; Meal flurs. &gt;&gt; Meal flur. &gt;&gt; Meal flur. &gt;&gt; Meal flur. &gt;&gt; How big are the eggs? &gt;&gt; How big are the eggs? &gt;&gt; How big are the eggs? &gt;&gt; Uh, they're half the size of a standard &gt;&gt; Uh, they're half the size of a standard &gt;&gt; Uh, they're half the size of a standard gradea large egg from the supermarket. gradea large egg from the supermarket. gradea large egg from the supermarket. &gt;&gt; Are they tasty? &gt;&gt; Are they tasty? &gt;&gt; Are they tasty? &gt;&gt; Very tasty. &gt;&gt; Very tasty. &gt;&gt; Very tasty. &gt;&gt; Okay. How many does it take to make a &gt;&gt; Okay. How many does it take to make a &gt;&gt; Okay. How many does it take to make a decent sized omelette? decent sized omelette? decent sized omelette? &gt;&gt; Um, well, double the number that you &gt;&gt; Um, well, double the number that you &gt;&gt; Um, well, double the number that you would normally put in that. would normally put in that. would normally put in that. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, for me it would be like eight. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, for me it would be like eight. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, for me it would be like eight. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, when did you start raising &gt;&gt; Okay. So, when did you start raising &gt;&gt; Okay. So, when did you start raising chickens? &gt;&gt; So, I had I had bantms when I was a kid. &gt;&gt; So, I had I had bantms when I was a kid. &gt;&gt; So, I had I had bantms when I was a kid. I live in Chapel Hill and around I live in Chapel Hill and around I live in Chapel Hill and around 2012 or so, maybe 2011, the town changed 2012 or so, maybe 2011, the town changed 2012 or so, maybe 2011, the town changed its zoning laws to allow uh chickens in its zoning laws to allow uh chickens in its zoning laws to allow uh chickens in the kind of neighborhood that I live in. the kind of neighborhood that I live in. the kind of neighborhood that I live in. So, I'm like, okay, this is this is what So, I'm like, okay, this is this is what So, I'm like, okay, this is this is what we're going to do. My husband's allergic we're going to do. My husband's allergic we're going to do. My husband's allergic to um dogs and cats and anything with to um dogs and cats and anything with to um dogs and cats and anything with fur. So, you know, chickens were kind of fur. So, you know, chickens were kind of fur. So, you know, chickens were kind of the option. I suppose we could have the option. I suppose we could have the option. I suppose we could have gotten rabbits and kept them outside. gotten rabbits and kept them outside. gotten rabbits and kept them outside. cat. &gt;&gt; You know, I won't say that we didn't &gt;&gt; You know, I won't say that we didn't &gt;&gt; You know, I won't say that we didn't have that discussion, but it didn't go have that discussion, but it didn't go have that discussion, but it didn't go [laughter] anywhere. [laughter] anywhere. [laughter] anywhere. &gt;&gt; They're pretty funny. I got a friend. &gt;&gt; They're pretty funny. I got a friend. &gt;&gt; They're pretty funny. I got a friend. They're sweet. They're like little They're sweet. They're like little They're sweet. They're like little monkeys. They're always crawling up monkeys. They're always crawling up monkeys. They're always crawling up people. &gt;&gt; Well, they really I do know have met a &gt;&gt; Well, they really I do know have met a &gt;&gt; Well, they really I do know have met a hairless cat, and I do think that they hairless cat, and I do think that they hairless cat, and I do think that they have lovely personalities, you know, have lovely personalities, you know, have lovely personalities, you know, extrapolating from this and of one. Um, extrapolating from this and of one. Um, extrapolating from this and of one. Um, you know, because they don't look so you know, because they don't look so you know, because they don't look so great, so they can't get by on their great, so they can't get by on their great, so they can't get by on their looks. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, this is funny. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, this is funny. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness, this is funny. &gt;&gt; Oh dear. &gt;&gt; Oh dear. &gt;&gt; Oh dear. &gt;&gt; No, no, [laughter] no, no. It's I &gt;&gt; No, no, [laughter] no, no. It's I &gt;&gt; No, no, [laughter] no, no. It's I totally I buy it. totally I buy it. totally I buy it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So they're very, you know, very &gt;&gt; Yeah. So they're very, you know, very &gt;&gt; Yeah. So they're very, you know, very pleasant personality, I think. Um, and pleasant personality, I think. Um, and pleasant personality, I think. Um, and the warmth of them because you can, you the warmth of them because you can, you the warmth of them because you can, you really feel the warmth of their skin. really feel the warmth of their skin. really feel the warmth of their skin. &gt;&gt; But anyway, so chickens, chicken, &gt;&gt; But anyway, so chickens, chicken, &gt;&gt; But anyway, so chickens, chicken, chickens, it was, um, and is. And, um, I chickens, it was, um, and is. And, um, I chickens, it was, um, and is. And, um, I like the banttoms because they really like the banttoms because they really like the banttoms because they really have a lot of personality. You know, have a lot of personality. You know, have a lot of personality. You know, they haven't been bred to be egg layers. they haven't been bred to be egg layers. they haven't been bred to be egg layers. They've been bred to be pets. Um, and They've been bred to be pets. Um, and They've been bred to be pets. Um, and say they have a certain, you know, say they have a certain, you know, say they have a certain, you know, pleasing uh, personality and interest in pleasing uh, personality and interest in pleasing uh, personality and interest in interacting with people that I think interacting with people that I think interacting with people that I think might be different from, uh, standard might be different from, uh, standard might be different from, uh, standard kind of farm chickens. kind of farm chickens. kind of farm chickens. &gt;&gt; Well, I have a uh, non-invasive &gt;&gt; Well, I have a uh, non-invasive &gt;&gt; Well, I have a uh, non-invasive experiment for you to try. experiment for you to try. experiment for you to try. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Some years ago, I got very interested in &gt;&gt; Some years ago, I got very interested in &gt;&gt; Some years ago, I got very interested in the relationship between vision and the relationship between vision and the relationship between vision and brain states. Mhm. brain states. Mhm. brain states. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And there's some interesting literature &gt;&gt; And there's some interesting literature &gt;&gt; And there's some interesting literature about the fact that when we view about the fact that when we view about the fact that when we view horizons, uh especially from a vista uh especially from a vista uh especially from a vista um that um that um that it relaxes our autonomic nervous system, it relaxes our autonomic nervous system, it relaxes our autonomic nervous system, we go into more parasympathetic mode. we go into more parasympathetic mode. we go into more parasympathetic mode. &gt;&gt; And it turns out when we view horizons, &gt;&gt; And it turns out when we view horizons, &gt;&gt; And it turns out when we view horizons, our eyes naturally go into panoramic our eyes naturally go into panoramic our eyes naturally go into panoramic vision. We're not foviating to one. vision. We're not foviating to one. vision. We're not foviating to one. &gt;&gt; That's nerd speak by the way, &gt;&gt; That's nerd speak by the way, &gt;&gt; That's nerd speak by the way, neuroscience nerd speak to we're not neuroscience nerd speak to we're not neuroscience nerd speak to we're not focusing on one particular point. If you focusing on one particular point. If you focusing on one particular point. If you track one particular point, you track one particular point, you track one particular point, you obviously do a smooth pursuit of that obviously do a smooth pursuit of that obviously do a smooth pursuit of that point with your eyes. But um that you point with your eyes. But um that you point with your eyes. But um that you just go to a vista, you look at a just go to a vista, you look at a just go to a vista, you look at a horizon, you just your eyes naturally horizon, you just your eyes naturally horizon, you just your eyes naturally just dilate um as we say, right? But just dilate um as we say, right? But just dilate um as we say, right? But it's panoramic vision. Whereas when we it's panoramic vision. Whereas when we it's panoramic vision. Whereas when we um do a virgin's eye movement, bring our um do a virgin's eye movement, bring our um do a virgin's eye movement, bring our eyes together in a particular point, eyes together in a particular point, eyes together in a particular point, there's this really interesting increase there's this really interesting increase there's this really interesting increase in the output of areas like locus in the output of areas like locus in the output of areas like locus ceruius that are involved in attention, ceruius that are involved in attention, ceruius that are involved in attention, norepinephrine. I thought this is really norepinephrine. I thought this is really norepinephrine. I thought this is really wild and you know I was interested in wild and you know I was interested in wild and you know I was interested in respiration and brain states and respiration and brain states and respiration and brain states and &gt;&gt; like oh cool like maybe we're just &gt;&gt; like oh cool like maybe we're just &gt;&gt; like oh cool like maybe we're just staring into little boxes too much and staring into little boxes too much and staring into little boxes too much and that's why we feel like so attentionally that's why we feel like so attentionally that's why we feel like so attentionally um ex exhausted depleted. um ex exhausted depleted. um ex exhausted depleted. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. Attention's a resource. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. Attention's a resource. &gt;&gt; Makes sense. Attention's a resource. Okay. I think there's some evidence now Okay. I think there's some evidence now Okay. I think there's some evidence now to support every one of those to support every one of those to support every one of those statements. Although we need more brain statements. Although we need more brain statements. Although we need more brain recordings from humans to really get to recordings from humans to really get to recordings from humans to really get to the nitty-gritty. But then [laughter] the nitty-gritty. But then [laughter] the nitty-gritty. But then [laughter] my graduate adviser who unfortunately is my graduate adviser who unfortunately is my graduate adviser who unfortunately is passed away um had told me some time ago passed away um had told me some time ago passed away um had told me some time ago she said you know you can hypnotize she said you know you can hypnotize she said you know you can hypnotize chickens and I said um really cuz that's chickens and I said um really cuz that's chickens and I said um really cuz that's a lyric in an Iggy pop song uh a lyric in an Iggy pop song uh a lyric in an Iggy pop song uh hypnotizing chickens and I thought wait hypnotizing chickens and I thought wait hypnotizing chickens and I thought wait what? And she said, 'Yeah, you can what? And she said, 'Yeah, you can what? And she said, 'Yeah, you can hypnotize chickens, but they're not hypnotize chickens, but they're not hypnotize chickens, but they're not really hypnotized. really hypnotized. really hypnotized. They're just hyperfocused. And I was They're just hyperfocused. And I was They're just hyperfocused. And I was like, 'Isn't that what hypnosis is?' And like, 'Isn't that what hypnosis is?' And like, 'Isn't that what hypnosis is?' And she's like, "Yeah, I guess." I thought she's like, "Yeah, I guess." I thought she's like, "Yeah, I guess." I thought we always thought hypnosis was like a we always thought hypnosis was like a we always thought hypnosis was like a dream hypnosis is a state of hyperfocus. dream hypnosis is a state of hyperfocus. dream hypnosis is a state of hyperfocus. I have a colleague who does clinical I have a colleague who does clinical I have a colleague who does clinical hypnosis, David Spiegel. It's a pro hypnosis, David Spiegel. It's a pro hypnosis, David Spiegel. It's a pro approved by the American Psychiatric approved by the American Psychiatric approved by the American Psychiatric Association. Hyperfocus. Here's what you Association. Hyperfocus. Here's what you Association. Hyperfocus. Here's what you do, and you can find this. People who do, and you can find this. People who do, and you can find this. People who grew up on farms do this. They'll, and grew up on farms do this. They'll, and grew up on farms do this. They'll, and there videos of this on YouTube. They there videos of this on YouTube. They there videos of this on YouTube. They take a chicken and they'll hold the take a chicken and they'll hold the take a chicken and they'll hold the chicken and they'll draw a line in the chicken and they'll draw a line in the chicken and they'll draw a line in the dirt and they'll place the chicken's dirt and they'll place the chicken's dirt and they'll place the chicken's beak on the line and the chicken will beak on the line and the chicken will beak on the line and the chicken will just stay there just stay there just stay there for many minutes. You actually for many minutes. You actually for many minutes. You actually have to pick them up and kind of get have to pick them up and kind of get have to pick them up and kind of get them to orient to the rest of their them to orient to the rest of their them to orient to the rest of their visual field. Turns out that any birds visual field. Turns out that any birds visual field. Turns out that any birds that eat off the ground have a very that eat off the ground have a very that eat off the ground have a very complex like sensory motor challenge complex like sensory motor challenge complex like sensory motor challenge that my colleague the late he died of that my colleague the late he died of that my colleague the late he died of old age. old age. old age. Harvey Carton told me about which is, Harvey Carton told me about which is, Harvey Carton told me about which is, you know, they got this tiny beak and you know, they got this tiny beak and you know, they got this tiny beak and the seed is small the seed is small the seed is small &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; and &gt;&gt; they, you know, you and I could pick up &gt;&gt; they, you know, you and I could pick up &gt;&gt; they, you know, you and I could pick up things off a table and pretty things off a table and pretty things off a table and pretty quickly, but they're doing this with quickly, but they're doing this with quickly, but they're doing this with this tiny be, but their eyes are on the this tiny be, but their eyes are on the this tiny be, but their eyes are on the side of their head. side of their head. side of their head. &gt;&gt; So, in order to do that, as their head &gt;&gt; So, in order to do that, as their head &gt;&gt; So, in order to do that, as their head descends really fast, in order to not descends really fast, in order to not descends really fast, in order to not smash their beak into the surface and smash their beak into the surface and smash their beak into the surface and make an accurate make an accurate make an accurate &gt;&gt; uh pickup of the seed or whatever it is, &gt;&gt; uh pickup of the seed or whatever it is, &gt;&gt; uh pickup of the seed or whatever it is, &gt;&gt; they or bug, &gt;&gt; they or bug, &gt;&gt; they or bug, &gt;&gt; their eyes undergo a virgin eye &gt;&gt; their eyes undergo a virgin eye &gt;&gt; their eyes undergo a virgin eye movement. they shift their eyes inward movement. they shift their eyes inward movement. they shift their eyes inward and they get a little cone of attention. and they get a little cone of attention. and they get a little cone of attention. So when you draw a line and you focus So when you draw a line and you focus So when you draw a line and you focus them down, they're literally them down, they're literally them down, they're literally &gt;&gt; they're stuck in that cone of attention. &gt;&gt; they're stuck in that cone of attention. &gt;&gt; they're stuck in that cone of attention. &gt;&gt; And then I started looking at the &gt;&gt; And then I started looking at the &gt;&gt; And then I started looking at the literature on behavioral treatments for literature on behavioral treatments for literature on behavioral treatments for ADHD and or just for attention. And not ADHD and or just for attention. And not ADHD and or just for attention. And not in this country, but in China, many in this country, but in China, many in this country, but in China, many schoolroom classrooms begin before the schoolroom classrooms begin before the schoolroom classrooms begin before the lesson with the kids literally focusing lesson with the kids literally focusing lesson with the kids literally focusing on a single spot, which seems a little on a single spot, which seems a little on a single spot, which seems a little bit like kind of uh military. Um but bit like kind of uh military. Um but bit like kind of uh military. Um but they have embraced this relationship they have embraced this relationship they have embraced this relationship between visual attention between visual attention between visual attention and overall kind of ability to and overall kind of ability to and overall kind of ability to cognitively focus and chickens do it. cognitively focus and chickens do it. cognitively focus and chickens do it. &gt;&gt; Kids in China are doing it and it &gt;&gt; Kids in China are doing it and it &gt;&gt; Kids in China are doing it and it actually has been shown to work pretty actually has been shown to work pretty actually has been shown to work pretty well for improving attention in you know well for improving attention in you know well for improving attention in you know the subsequent you know 40 minutes the subsequent you know 40 minutes the subsequent you know 40 minutes to an hour. to an hour. to an hour. &gt;&gt; That's really interesting. &gt;&gt; That's really interesting. &gt;&gt; That's really interesting. &gt;&gt; The so our attention tends to follow our &gt;&gt; The so our attention tends to follow our &gt;&gt; The so our attention tends to follow our vision not necessarily the other way vision not necessarily the other way vision not necessarily the other way around. So, I've seen some of these around. So, I've seen some of these around. So, I've seen some of these chicken YouTube videos. Um, but I chicken YouTube videos. Um, but I chicken YouTube videos. Um, but I haven't I haven't dug into it yet to um haven't I haven't dug into it yet to um haven't I haven't dug into it yet to um try it with my own chickens. But now try it with my own chickens. But now try it with my own chickens. But now you're motivating me to try it. you're motivating me to try it. you're motivating me to try it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Let me know what you find. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Let me know what you find. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Let me know what you find. &gt;&gt; As far as you know, is the drawing of &gt;&gt; As far as you know, is the drawing of &gt;&gt; As far as you know, is the drawing of the line an important part of this. the line an important part of this. the line an important part of this. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it is. &gt;&gt; You can't just put a line down and then &gt;&gt; You can't just put a line down and then &gt;&gt; You can't just put a line down and then bring the chicken over. bring the chicken over. bring the chicken over. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have to look at these videos &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have to look at these videos &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I have to look at these videos again. It's been a little while. But again. It's been a little while. But again. It's been a little while. But what they do is they place the what they do is they place the what they do is they place the chicken the kind of beak facing down, chicken the kind of beak facing down, chicken the kind of beak facing down, but they're not like pushing the but they're not like pushing the but they're not like pushing the bird down and then they draw bird down and then they draw bird down and then they draw the line starting from the beak. the line starting from the beak. the line starting from the beak. &gt;&gt; Starting no starting &gt;&gt; Starting no starting &gt;&gt; Starting no starting &gt;&gt; I can't remember if it's starting from &gt;&gt; I can't remember if it's starting from &gt;&gt; I can't remember if it's starting from the beak outward or outward toward the beak outward or outward toward the beak outward or outward toward the beak. What it does is it Harvey was the beak. What it does is it Harvey was the beak. What it does is it Harvey was the one. Okay. But Harvey the late great one. Okay. But Harvey the late great one. Okay. But Harvey the late great Harvey Cardon I should just mention he's Harvey Cardon I should just mention he's Harvey Cardon I should just mention he's uh I'll put a link to an obit I wrote. uh I'll put a link to an obit I wrote. uh I'll put a link to an obit I wrote. He was one of the He was one of the He was one of the &gt;&gt; history and histories and the world's &gt;&gt; history and histories and the world's &gt;&gt; history and histories and the world's most incredible comparative most incredible comparative most incredible comparative neuroscientists. He also was a fire hose neuroscientists. He also was a fire hose neuroscientists. He also was a fire hose of information. He used to walk into my of information. He used to walk into my of information. He used to walk into my lab and just start talking about diving lab and just start talking about diving lab and just start talking about diving birds and talk. Yeah, he was one of birds and talk. Yeah, he was one of birds and talk. Yeah, he was one of those. But those. But those. But &gt;&gt; uh he made me seem quiet. &gt;&gt; uh he made me seem quiet. &gt;&gt; uh he made me seem quiet. &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; he explained that they when the birds &gt;&gt; he explained that they when the birds &gt;&gt; he explained that they when the birds which have eyes on the side of their which have eyes on the side of their which have eyes on the side of their head do this virgin's eye movement, head do this virgin's eye movement, head do this virgin's eye movement, &gt;&gt; they get locked there. &gt;&gt; they get locked there. &gt;&gt; they get locked there. &gt;&gt; So maybe it has to be away from the beak &gt;&gt; So maybe it has to be away from the beak &gt;&gt; So maybe it has to be away from the beak toward the beak toward the beak toward the beak &gt;&gt; probably. Yeah. Um, and it's funny &gt;&gt; probably. Yeah. Um, and it's funny &gt;&gt; probably. Yeah. Um, and it's funny because I mentioned this a few times um, because I mentioned this a few times um, because I mentioned this a few times um, places before I had a podcast and people places before I had a podcast and people places before I had a podcast and people who grew up on farms were like, "Oh who grew up on farms were like, "Oh who grew up on farms were like, "Oh yeah, we would do that." You can yeah, we would do that." You can yeah, we would do that." You can actually you can actually then take the actually you can actually then take the actually you can actually then take the bird and flip it over. bird and flip it over. bird and flip it over. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Aggressive roosters become very calm. &gt;&gt; Aggressive roosters become very calm. &gt;&gt; Aggressive roosters become very calm. &gt;&gt; You can or m you can work with them &gt;&gt; You can or m you can work with them &gt;&gt; You can or m you can work with them manageable. And so the vision drives manageable. And so the vision drives manageable. And so the vision drives our brain states. And I think about this our brain states. And I think about this our brain states. And I think about this a lot in the context of the phone where a lot in the context of the phone where a lot in the context of the phone where our vision is brought into this little our vision is brought into this little our vision is brought into this little box, &gt;&gt; but the number of different contexts &gt;&gt; but the number of different contexts &gt;&gt; but the number of different contexts within that box is infinite. within that box is infinite. within that box is infinite. &gt;&gt; I mean, do you find &gt;&gt; I mean, do you find &gt;&gt; I mean, do you find I mean diving into the phone thing, um I mean diving into the phone thing, um I mean diving into the phone thing, um I'm definitely going to try the chicken I'm definitely going to try the chicken I'm definitely going to try the chicken thing. Um thing. Um thing. Um &gt;&gt; yeah, let me know. &gt;&gt; yeah, let me know. &gt;&gt; yeah, let me know. &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe I'll make a video. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe I'll make a video. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah, maybe I'll make a video. Um &gt;&gt; I mean blinders like they put on horses. &gt;&gt; I mean blinders like they put on horses. &gt;&gt; I mean blinders like they put on horses. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they put on Yeah. I mean &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they put on Yeah. I mean &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they put on Yeah. I mean our own fal falconers use these, right? our own fal falconers use these, right? our own fal falconers use these, right? The idea is you you're trying to The idea is you you're trying to The idea is you you're trying to &gt;&gt; physically make you focus on one thing. &gt;&gt; physically make you focus on one thing. &gt;&gt; physically make you focus on one thing. &gt;&gt; That's right. And there's some funny &gt;&gt; That's right. And there's some funny &gt;&gt; That's right. And there's some funny pictures um that you can find on X every pictures um that you can find on X every pictures um that you can find on X every once in a while of focusing tools from once in a while of focusing tools from once in a while of focusing tools from the 1930s where they would literally put the 1930s where they would literally put the 1930s where they would literally put kids in these helmets with just two kids in these helmets with just two kids in these helmets with just two little eye portals and it was supposed little eye portals and it was supposed little eye portals and it was supposed to keep the kids that couldn't pay to keep the kids that couldn't pay to keep the kids that couldn't pay attention focused on their work so they attention focused on their work so they attention focused on their work so they wouldn't see any other kids. We think wouldn't see any other kids. We think wouldn't see any other kids. We think about it so it seems so silly and so about it so it seems so silly and so about it so it seems so silly and so barbaric. Well, I think too it could be barbaric. Well, I think too it could be barbaric. Well, I think too it could be helpful to ponder why one's attention is helpful to ponder why one's attention is helpful to ponder why one's attention is being drawn to other things because I being drawn to other things because I being drawn to other things because I think that um think that um think that um like the most relaxed I can get these like the most relaxed I can get these like the most relaxed I can get these days is if I know someone else is days is if I know someone else is days is if I know someone else is monitoring the state of the world and monitoring the state of the world and monitoring the state of the world and will let me know if there's some major will let me know if there's some major will let me know if there's some major disaster. &gt;&gt; I've had to do some of that outsourcing &gt;&gt; I've had to do some of that outsourcing &gt;&gt; I've had to do some of that outsourcing too, &gt;&gt; right? But having that outsourced is &gt;&gt; right? But having that outsourced is &gt;&gt; right? But having that outsourced is super helpful because it satisfies the super helpful because it satisfies the super helpful because it satisfies the need to have a warning system need to have a warning system need to have a warning system &gt;&gt; going on at all times &gt;&gt; going on at all times &gt;&gt; going on at all times &gt;&gt; and it allows me to kind of, you know, &gt;&gt; and it allows me to kind of, you know, &gt;&gt; and it allows me to kind of, you know, then focus in on, you know, what's in then focus in on, you know, what's in then focus in on, you know, what's in front of me right at them at the moment. front of me right at them at the moment. front of me right at them at the moment. I give you an example that's not really I give you an example that's not really I give you an example that's not really about attention, but it's about like about attention, but it's about like about attention, but it's about like what's the best way for me to achieve a what's the best way for me to achieve a what's the best way for me to achieve a state of relaxation. So, I went on a state of relaxation. So, I went on a state of relaxation. So, I went on a lovely rafting trip in Idaho this past lovely rafting trip in Idaho this past lovely rafting trip in Idaho this past summer. I have a Zolio satellite summer. I have a Zolio satellite summer. I have a Zolio satellite communicator. This is basically a thing communicator. This is basically a thing communicator. This is basically a thing that interacts with your phone and that interacts with your phone and that interacts with your phone and interacts with a satellite. Um, you can interacts with a satellite. Um, you can interacts with a satellite. Um, you can you can't make phone calls, but you can you can't make phone calls, but you can you can't make phone calls, but you can send and receive text messages. And I send and receive text messages. And I send and receive text messages. And I brought that along because I felt that I brought that along because I felt that I brought that along because I felt that I would probably be more relaxed knowing would probably be more relaxed knowing would probably be more relaxed knowing that if something really bad happened, that if something really bad happened, that if something really bad happened, people could reach me people could reach me people could reach me &gt;&gt; than being completely out of touch. Mhm. &gt;&gt; than being completely out of touch. Mhm. &gt;&gt; than being completely out of touch. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So for me that sort of middle &gt;&gt; So for me that sort of middle &gt;&gt; So for me that sort of middle space of like some contact space of like some contact space of like some contact &gt;&gt; otherwise I'm going to be you know a &gt;&gt; otherwise I'm going to be you know a &gt;&gt; otherwise I'm going to be you know a heightened state of arousal when I come heightened state of arousal when I come heightened state of arousal when I come back out from the back out from the back out from the you know from the remote wilderness. you know from the remote wilderness. you know from the remote wilderness. &gt;&gt; You know I think about people like my &gt;&gt; You know I think about people like my &gt;&gt; You know I think about people like my niec's generation. She's you know late niec's generation. She's you know late niec's generation. She's you know late teens about to hit her 20s. And to teens about to hit her 20s. And to teens about to hit her 20s. And to completely remove oneself from uh completely remove oneself from uh completely remove oneself from uh smartphone technology in that age smartphone technology in that age smartphone technology in that age bracket &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um sets up a kind of a return to or a sets up a kind of a return to or a sets up a kind of a return to or a return to communication with others that return to communication with others that return to communication with others that probably involves a lot of stress. probably involves a lot of stress. probably involves a lot of stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like what are you going to get? It's &gt;&gt; Like what are you going to get? It's &gt;&gt; Like what are you going to get? It's like opening your email after a like opening your email after a like opening your email after a two-month vacation. You just can't do two-month vacation. You just can't do two-month vacation. You just can't do that when you're running a lab. And then that when you're running a lab. And then that when you're running a lab. And then the re-entry is so painful the re-entry is so painful the re-entry is so painful &gt;&gt; of that sort of onslaught of &gt;&gt; of that sort of onslaught of &gt;&gt; of that sort of onslaught of &gt;&gt; of things and um you know even emotional &gt;&gt; of things and um you know even emotional &gt;&gt; of things and um you know even emotional messages from people that if you read messages from people that if you read messages from people that if you read them in order you know and it's five or them in order you know and it's five or them in order you know and it's five or six days ago and you're like then you six days ago and you're like then you six days ago and you're like then you see follow-up messages and things got see follow-up messages and things got see follow-up messages and things got resolved without you usually fingers resolved without you usually fingers resolved without you usually fingers crossed usually that's what happens. It crossed usually that's what happens. It crossed usually that's what happens. It so rapidly wipes out that state of calm so rapidly wipes out that state of calm so rapidly wipes out that state of calm that you can get from being out in the that you can get from being out in the that you can get from being out in the wilderness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I will um periodically go into &gt;&gt; Yeah. I will um periodically go into &gt;&gt; Yeah. I will um periodically go into the wilderness. I did this recently and the wilderness. I did this recently and the wilderness. I did this recently and I didn't notify enough people. I didn't notify enough people. I didn't notify enough people. I notified the critical ones notified the critical ones notified the critical ones &gt;&gt; and people don't like it. &gt;&gt; and people don't like it. &gt;&gt; and people don't like it. &gt;&gt; No. Well, I wish we could set up an auto &gt;&gt; No. Well, I wish we could set up an auto &gt;&gt; No. Well, I wish we could set up an auto reply for text messaging. reply for text messaging. reply for text messaging. &gt;&gt; That would make me feel more calm. What &gt;&gt; That would make me feel more calm. What &gt;&gt; That would make me feel more calm. What I'm hearing from you is that you embrace I'm hearing from you is that you embrace I'm hearing from you is that you embrace the natural, you know, peaks and valleys the natural, you know, peaks and valleys the natural, you know, peaks and valleys in your attention. You've figured out in your attention. You've figured out in your attention. You've figured out what works for you in different what works for you in different what works for you in different contexts. It's not like it's always one contexts. It's not like it's always one contexts. It's not like it's always one sentence a break. One sentence. It sentence a break. One sentence. It sentence a break. One sentence. It really depends. And I think, really depends. And I think, really depends. And I think, &gt;&gt; you know, we hear a lot about how &gt;&gt; you know, we hear a lot about how &gt;&gt; you know, we hear a lot about how phones are the problem. We had Jonathan phones are the problem. We had Jonathan phones are the problem. We had Jonathan Haye on this podcast. He's the most Haye on this podcast. He's the most Haye on this podcast. He's the most vocal out there. And I really support vocal out there. And I really support vocal out there. And I really support his message. his message. his message. &gt;&gt; Um, so I want to be clear about that. &gt;&gt; Um, so I want to be clear about that. &gt;&gt; Um, so I want to be clear about that. But &gt;&gt; for many people, it's just not feasible. &gt;&gt; for many people, it's just not feasible. &gt;&gt; for many people, it's just not feasible. people with kids, people with jobs, people with kids, people with jobs, people with kids, people with jobs, people with, you know, um you know, people with, you know, um you know, people with, you know, um you know, outside the elementary and high school outside the elementary and high school outside the elementary and high school classroom, &gt;&gt; people need to be accessible if &gt;&gt; people need to be accessible if &gt;&gt; people need to be accessible if something critical comes through. And something critical comes through. And something critical comes through. And and I think that's really the thing is and I think that's really the thing is and I think that's really the thing is it's just very unfiltered it's just very unfiltered it's just very unfiltered &gt;&gt; and that's what is leading to so &gt;&gt; and that's what is leading to so &gt;&gt; and that's what is leading to so many challenges with getting real work many challenges with getting real work many challenges with getting real work done. &gt;&gt; I think the movement to get them out of &gt;&gt; I think the movement to get them out of &gt;&gt; I think the movement to get them out of schools is good. Um, you know, we I felt schools is good. Um, you know, we I felt schools is good. Um, you know, we I felt like we as parents, we had no choice like we as parents, we had no choice like we as parents, we had no choice that the that our children were being it that the that our children were being it that the that our children were being it was a required part of what they had was a required part of what they had was a required part of what they had to do in the classroom was to have to do in the classroom was to have to do in the classroom was to have access to the internet on something. access to the internet on something. access to the internet on something. &gt;&gt; You know, at least recognizing that &gt;&gt; You know, at least recognizing that &gt;&gt; You know, at least recognizing that problem and being a little more problem and being a little more problem and being a little more thoughtful about it. And, you know, the thoughtful about it. And, you know, the thoughtful about it. And, you know, the cases where schools have decided to keep cases where schools have decided to keep cases where schools have decided to keep the phones all the way out of the phones all the way out of the phones all the way out of the classroom, I think are um certainly classroom, I think are um certainly classroom, I think are um certainly that's worth trying and let's see how it that's worth trying and let's see how it that's worth trying and let's see how it goes. So, I try to be aware of what am I goes. So, I try to be aware of what am I goes. So, I try to be aware of what am I getting from the phone at any particular getting from the phone at any particular getting from the phone at any particular moment in time or for any particular moment in time or for any particular moment in time or for any particular purpose. So, I feel pretty good about purpose. So, I feel pretty good about purpose. So, I feel pretty good about texting with my friends and family. texting with my friends and family. texting with my friends and family. &gt;&gt; I feel great about using it to um have &gt;&gt; I feel great about using it to um have &gt;&gt; I feel great about using it to um have access to public transit in a city that access to public transit in a city that access to public transit in a city that I'm not familiar with. I'm not familiar with. I'm not familiar with. &gt;&gt; Love that. &gt;&gt; Love that. &gt;&gt; Love that. &gt;&gt; Love it as a travel tool. Love it for, &gt;&gt; Love it as a travel tool. Love it for, &gt;&gt; Love it as a travel tool. Love it for, you know, booking plane flights and you know, booking plane flights and you know, booking plane flights and things like that. So convenient that I things like that. So convenient that I things like that. So convenient that I can do that. It frees up time that I can do that. It frees up time that I can do that. It frees up time that I would otherwise be at my computer doing would otherwise be at my computer doing would otherwise be at my computer doing some deeper work, you know? Okay, now I some deeper work, you know? Okay, now I some deeper work, you know? Okay, now I can do that on my phone somewhere when I can do that on my phone somewhere when I can do that on my phone somewhere when I just have a free moment. So, I love just have a free moment. So, I love just have a free moment. So, I love that. I think it's useful for me to try that. I think it's useful for me to try that. I think it's useful for me to try to be aware of what do I want to get out to be aware of what do I want to get out to be aware of what do I want to get out of my phone right now and am I just of my phone right now and am I just of my phone right now and am I just bored? you know, if I'm using it because bored? you know, if I'm using it because bored? you know, if I'm using it because I'm just bored, that's the thing that, I'm just bored, that's the thing that, I'm just bored, that's the thing that, okay, let me see if I can swap it out okay, let me see if I can swap it out okay, let me see if I can swap it out for something that might be a little for something that might be a little for something that might be a little healthier, like listening to a podcast healthier, like listening to a podcast healthier, like listening to a podcast or listening to an audio book or reading or listening to an audio book or reading or listening to an audio book or reading a book on my phone or reading a book a book on my phone or reading a book a book on my phone or reading a book actually a book. Um, that can be good. actually a book. Um, that can be good. actually a book. Um, that can be good. I've tried to set myself up with some I've tried to set myself up with some I've tried to set myself up with some exit paths from being on my phone. like, exit paths from being on my phone. like, exit paths from being on my phone. like, okay, yes, I will admit it's one of the okay, yes, I will admit it's one of the okay, yes, I will admit it's one of the first things I do in the morning. I know first things I do in the morning. I know first things I do in the morning. I know I should go outside and touch grass and I should go outside and touch grass and I should go outside and touch grass and get some sunlight. I know. I know. get some sunlight. I know. I know. get some sunlight. I know. I know. &gt;&gt; Set that circadian rhythm. &gt;&gt; Set that circadian rhythm. &gt;&gt; Set that circadian rhythm. &gt;&gt; I Well, I often wake up before it's &gt;&gt; I Well, I often wake up before it's &gt;&gt; I Well, I often wake up before it's light out, so light out, so light out, so &gt;&gt; I have to wait for that anyway. So, &gt;&gt; I have to wait for that anyway. So, &gt;&gt; I have to wait for that anyway. So, for example, I'll do my one or two hits for example, I'll do my one or two hits for example, I'll do my one or two hits on Dolingo on Dolingo on Dolingo &gt;&gt; and one or two other language apps. I'll &gt;&gt; and one or two other language apps. I'll &gt;&gt; and one or two other language apps. I'll do a couple of my favorite games on the, do a couple of my favorite games on the, do a couple of my favorite games on the, you know, New York Times games site. Um, you know, New York Times games site. Um, you know, New York Times games site. Um, but those are usually things that like but those are usually things that like but those are usually things that like there's a sense of satiety. There's a there's a sense of satiety. There's a there's a sense of satiety. There's a sense of being finished. sense of being finished. sense of being finished. &gt;&gt; Like it's not an endless scroll. &gt;&gt; Like it's not an endless scroll. &gt;&gt; Like it's not an endless scroll. &gt;&gt; I have completed one lesson, &gt;&gt; I have completed one lesson, &gt;&gt; I have completed one lesson, &gt;&gt; so there's a moment to get off the &gt;&gt; so there's a moment to get off the &gt;&gt; so there's a moment to get off the phone. &gt;&gt; I'd love to have an app that &gt;&gt; I'd love to have an app that &gt;&gt; I'd love to have an app that limited the endless scroll on social limited the endless scroll on social limited the endless scroll on social media, like an interface to social media media, like an interface to social media media, like an interface to social media that sort of served me. Mhm. that sort of served me. Mhm. that sort of served me. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um maybe some designated number of posts &gt;&gt; Um maybe some designated number of posts &gt;&gt; Um maybe some designated number of posts and then I would have to take some and then I would have to take some and then I would have to take some explicit action to get more and that explicit action to get more and that explicit action to get more and that might help me get off. might help me get off. might help me get off. &gt;&gt; Yeah. based on the uh dopamine &gt;&gt; Yeah. based on the uh dopamine &gt;&gt; Yeah. based on the uh dopamine literature and um everything I know literature and um everything I know literature and um everything I know about the brain, I decided that um any about the brain, I decided that um any about the brain, I decided that um any activity that activity that activity that has a seamless on-ramp to full attention has a seamless on-ramp to full attention has a seamless on-ramp to full attention &gt;&gt; and that has no end point. You mentioned &gt;&gt; and that has no end point. You mentioned &gt;&gt; and that has no end point. You mentioned end point end point end point &gt;&gt; is the thing to be really careful of. &gt;&gt; is the thing to be really careful of. &gt;&gt; is the thing to be really careful of. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, the seamless on-ramp to grabbing it, &gt;&gt; So, the seamless on-ramp to grabbing it, &gt;&gt; So, the seamless on-ramp to grabbing it, full attention. It's like from flat sur full attention. It's like from flat sur full attention. It's like from flat sur it's like ball bearing from flat surface it's like ball bearing from flat surface it's like ball bearing from flat surface into the trench. into the trench. into the trench. &gt;&gt; There's no work involved, &gt;&gt; There's no work involved, &gt;&gt; There's no work involved, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And then you're there and you can stay &gt;&gt; And then you're there and you can stay &gt;&gt; And then you're there and you can stay there as long as you want. there as long as you want. there as long as you want. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Doesn't kick you out. You have to kick &gt;&gt; Doesn't kick you out. You have to kick &gt;&gt; Doesn't kick you out. You have to kick yourself out yourself out yourself out &gt;&gt; or life kicks you out cuz you didn't go &gt;&gt; or life kicks you out cuz you didn't go &gt;&gt; or life kicks you out cuz you didn't go do something or something happens. do something or something happens. do something or something happens. &gt;&gt; So, that's key. Um, so that's the slot &gt;&gt; So, that's key. Um, so that's the slot &gt;&gt; So, that's key. Um, so that's the slot the slot machine analogy. Very easy to the slot machine analogy. Very easy to the slot machine analogy. Very easy to play a slot machine play a slot machine play a slot machine &gt;&gt; and it's very easy to spend out all your &gt;&gt; and it's very easy to spend out all your &gt;&gt; and it's very easy to spend out all your money on a slot machine. And so they money on a slot machine. And so they money on a slot machine. And so they created this thing like where you can go created this thing like where you can go created this thing like where you can go get more money out of a machine, right? get more money out of a machine, right? get more money out of a machine, right? So you can continue playing on the other So you can continue playing on the other So you can continue playing on the other machine. And that's the same thing, but machine. And that's the same thing, but machine. And that's the same thing, but it's how seamless it is. Like you it's how seamless it is. Like you it's how seamless it is. Like you don't even need to learn the card game don't even need to learn the card game don't even need to learn the card game to gamble. You just have to know how to gamble. You just have to know how to gamble. You just have to know how to pull a lever, press a button. pull a lever, press a button. pull a lever, press a button. &gt;&gt; Social media is a bit the same. My &gt;&gt; Social media is a bit the same. My &gt;&gt; Social media is a bit the same. My solution to the social media thing is I solution to the social media thing is I solution to the social media thing is I took an old phone. took an old phone. took an old phone. &gt;&gt; I put X and Instagram on that phone. &gt;&gt; I put X and Instagram on that phone. &gt;&gt; I put X and Instagram on that phone. Those are the only two social media Those are the only two social media Those are the only two social media platforms I use. platforms I use. platforms I use. &gt;&gt; And it's somebody sends me something on &gt;&gt; And it's somebody sends me something on &gt;&gt; And it's somebody sends me something on my phone like a social media. I don't I my phone like a social media. I don't I my phone like a social media. I don't I can't go to it. So my I have to can't go to it. So my I have to can't go to it. So my I have to segregate social media. I have a social segregate social media. I have a social segregate social media. I have a social media phone and I only get a certain media phone and I only get a certain media phone and I only get a certain amount of time with it. amount of time with it. amount of time with it. &gt;&gt; You can't get into your social media &gt;&gt; You can't get into your social media &gt;&gt; You can't get into your social media from a browser. from a browser. from a browser. &gt;&gt; Uh no. &gt;&gt; Uh no. &gt;&gt; Uh no. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; No. I So like if someone sends me an &gt;&gt; No. I So like if someone sends me an &gt;&gt; No. I So like if someone sends me an Instagram post, I click on I can't see Instagram post, I click on I can't see Instagram post, I click on I can't see it. I get that error saying sign in and it. I get that error saying sign in and it. I get that error saying sign in and I I'm not signed in. It's like I don't I I'm not signed in. It's like I don't I I'm not signed in. It's like I don't even know my password. Okay. even know my password. Okay. even know my password. Okay. &gt;&gt; It's written someplace. &gt;&gt; It's written someplace. &gt;&gt; It's written someplace. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But I have a password generator. It &gt;&gt; But I have a password generator. It &gt;&gt; But I have a password generator. It updates all the time anyway. So yeah. updates all the time anyway. So yeah. updates all the time anyway. So yeah. So, so the solution was to create So, so the solution was to create So, so the solution was to create &gt;&gt; to log out and then have a phone that &gt;&gt; to log out and then have a phone that &gt;&gt; to log out and then have a phone that just had those. just had those. just had those. &gt;&gt; I don't even have the apps on my that &gt;&gt; I don't even have the apps on my that &gt;&gt; I don't even have the apps on my that phone. I would have to install the apps. phone. I would have to install the apps. phone. I would have to install the apps. I'd have to sign in. I'd have to I'd have to sign in. I'd have to I'd have to sign in. I'd have to I'd have to find my password, which my team have to find my password, which my team have to find my password, which my team knows I'm never going to happen. I'd knows I'm never going to happen. I'd knows I'm never going to happen. I'd have to have to have to &gt;&gt; log in. So, I just &gt;&gt; log in. So, I just &gt;&gt; log in. So, I just &gt;&gt; too many keystrokes. &gt;&gt; too many keystrokes. &gt;&gt; too many keystrokes. &gt;&gt; I just don't have access to it. I it &gt;&gt; I just don't have access to it. I it &gt;&gt; I just don't have access to it. I it unless I'm on that phone. So, unless I'm on that phone. So, unless I'm on that phone. So, &gt;&gt; that's great. I think that's perfect. &gt;&gt; that's great. I think that's perfect. &gt;&gt; that's great. I think that's perfect. &gt;&gt; That I mean works for me. &gt;&gt; That I mean works for me. &gt;&gt; That I mean works for me. &gt;&gt; Works for you. &gt;&gt; Works for you. &gt;&gt; Works for you. &gt;&gt; Works for me. But I think &gt;&gt; Works for me. But I think &gt;&gt; Works for me. But I think [clears throat] having systems like this [clears throat] having systems like this [clears throat] having systems like this is like going to be required for most is like going to be required for most is like going to be required for most people because I don't I don't think people because I don't I don't think people because I don't I don't think anyone's going to create the app that anyone's going to create the app that anyone's going to create the app that you're looking for. I hope they do, but you're looking for. I hope they do, but you're looking for. I hope they do, but I don't think they're going to. I don't think they're going to. I don't think they're going to. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So your lab is still super productive. &gt;&gt; So your lab is still super productive. &gt;&gt; So your lab is still super productive. So when you're in the lab presumably and So when you're in the lab presumably and So when you're in the lab presumably and &gt;&gt; interacting with students and writing &gt;&gt; interacting with students and writing &gt;&gt; interacting with students and writing grants and stuff, all this stuff falls grants and stuff, all this stuff falls grants and stuff, all this stuff falls away, right? It's because inside the lab away, right? It's because inside the lab away, right? It's because inside the lab context, it's like your workshop. I'm context, it's like your workshop. I'm context, it's like your workshop. I'm guessing that makes it much easier. guessing that makes it much easier. guessing that makes it much easier. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's true. That's true. Yeah. When I'm interacting with people at work When I'm interacting with people at work When I'm interacting with people at work or I'm in the actual lab, um it does it or I'm in the actual lab, um it does it or I'm in the actual lab, um it does it all falls away. all falls away. all falls away. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the cues to stay focused &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the cues to stay focused &gt;&gt; Yeah. The the cues to stay focused are very strong. are very strong. are very strong. &gt;&gt; I knew we were going to talk about the &gt;&gt; I knew we were going to talk about the &gt;&gt; I knew we were going to talk about the auditory system auditory system auditory system &gt;&gt; and we did. I knew we were going to talk &gt;&gt; and we did. I knew we were going to talk &gt;&gt; and we did. I knew we were going to talk about the visual system and we did. And about the visual system and we did. And about the visual system and we did. And I knew we were going to talk about their I knew we were going to talk about their I knew we were going to talk about their integration. And what I did not expect, integration. And what I did not expect, integration. And what I did not expect, what I'm so delighted happened is that what I'm so delighted happened is that what I'm so delighted happened is that you brought us into the realm of true you brought us into the realm of true you brought us into the realm of true multiensory integration and the extent multiensory integration and the extent multiensory integration and the extent to which our physical environment shapes to which our physical environment shapes to which our physical environment shapes the way that our brain works. And our the way that our brain works. And our the way that our brain works. And our brain is also creating its own internal brain is also creating its own internal brain is also creating its own internal environment and that we have a lot more environment and that we have a lot more environment and that we have a lot more control over that than perhaps we think control over that than perhaps we think control over that than perhaps we think unless we just leave it to unless we just leave it to unless we just leave it to circumstances, which is really the circumstances, which is really the circumstances, which is really the takeaway that I at least I pulled from takeaway that I at least I pulled from takeaway that I at least I pulled from this last portion of our conversation. this last portion of our conversation. this last portion of our conversation. So, thank you so much for coming here So, thank you so much for coming here So, thank you so much for coming here and explaining this. We've not um talked and explaining this. We've not um talked and explaining this. We've not um talked about multiensory integration before. I about multiensory integration before. I about multiensory integration before. I started off by saying that and now we started off by saying that and now we started off by saying that and now we have and um I'm so glad that you were have and um I'm so glad that you were have and um I'm so glad that you were the one to introduce it to us because the one to introduce it to us because the one to introduce it to us because it's a fascinating aspect of how we it's a fascinating aspect of how we it's a fascinating aspect of how we work. And it's really like the core work. And it's really like the core work. And it's really like the core mechanics of how we work. When we talk mechanics of how we work. When we talk mechanics of how we work. When we talk about thinking or you know or working or about thinking or you know or working or about thinking or you know or working or focus, we're not just talking about focus, we're not just talking about focus, we're not just talking about vision or hearing. We're talking about vision or hearing. We're talking about vision or hearing. We're talking about their verge. So, their verge. So, their verge. So, &gt;&gt; exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; exactly. Thank you. &gt;&gt; It's really wonderful. And let me know &gt;&gt; It's really wonderful. And let me know &gt;&gt; It's really wonderful. And let me know how the experiment with the chickens go. how the experiment with the chickens go. how the experiment with the chickens go. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. This has been great. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. This has been great. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. This has been great. &gt;&gt; Oh, I really enjoyed it. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Oh, I really enjoyed it. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Oh, I really enjoyed it. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Jennifer Gro. To discussion with Dr. Jennifer Gro. To discussion with Dr. Jennifer Gro. To learn more about her laboratory's work learn more about her laboratory's work learn more about her laboratory's work and to find a link to her excellent book and to find a link to her excellent book and to find a link to her excellent book entitled Making Space: How the Brain entitled Making Space: How the Brain entitled Making Space: How the Brain Knows Where Things Are, please see the Knows Where Things Are, please see the Knows Where Things Are, please see the show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review, and you can up to a five-star review, and you can up to a five-star review, and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubbermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Jennifer today's discussion with Dr. Jennifer today's discussion with Dr. Jennifer Gro. And last, but certainly not least, Gro. And last, but certainly not least, Gro. And last, but certainly not least, thank [music] you for your interest in thank [music] you for your interest in thank [music] you for your interest in science.