Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about how to we're going to talk all about how to we're going to talk all about how to optimize your workspace for maximum optimize your workspace for maximum optimize your workspace for maximum productivity. Indeed, that means to productivity. Indeed, that means to productivity. Indeed, that means to heighten levels of focus, to increase heighten levels of focus, to increase heighten levels of focus, to increase levels of creativity, to improve your levels of creativity, to improve your levels of creativity, to improve your ability to task switch. And this could ability to task switch. And this could ability to task switch. And this could be for sake of school or for work, be for sake of school or for work, be for sake of school or for work, creative endeavors, personal endeavors. creative endeavors, personal endeavors. creative endeavors, personal endeavors. This really extends to everybody. Most This really extends to everybody. Most This really extends to everybody. Most often when we hear about how to focus or often when we hear about how to focus or often when we hear about how to focus or how to get the most out of our work how to get the most out of our work how to get the most out of our work sessions, we hear about the biology and sessions, we hear about the biology and sessions, we hear about the biology and the psychology of that. the psychology of that. the psychology of that. We hear about dopamine and we hear about We hear about dopamine and we hear about We hear about dopamine and we hear about serotonin and we hear about caffeine. serotonin and we hear about caffeine. serotonin and we hear about caffeine. And indeed, those are topics that I've And indeed, those are topics that I've And indeed, those are topics that I've covered a lot on the Huberman Lab covered a lot on the Huberman Lab covered a lot on the Huberman Lab podcast. Today, we will touch on each of podcast. Today, we will touch on each of podcast. Today, we will touch on each of those, but we are mainly going to focus those, but we are mainly going to focus those, but we are mainly going to focus on how we arrange our physical on how we arrange our physical on how we arrange our physical environment and indeed how we arrange environment and indeed how we arrange environment and indeed how we arrange ourselves in that physical environment ourselves in that physical environment ourselves in that physical environment in order to bring out the best in our in order to bring out the best in our in order to bring out the best in our neurobiology. That is, how to put neurobiology. That is, how to put neurobiology. That is, how to put ourselves into a heightened state of ourselves into a heightened state of ourselves into a heightened state of focus by virtue of things as simple as focus by virtue of things as simple as focus by virtue of things as simple as where we place our screen relative to where we place our screen relative to where we place our screen relative to our eyes at a given time of day. Believe our eyes at a given time of day. Believe our eyes at a given time of day. Believe it or not, there's excellent research on it or not, there's excellent research on it or not, there's excellent research on this and there's excellent research, for this and there's excellent research, for this and there's excellent research, for instance, on whether or not you should instance, on whether or not you should instance, on whether or not you should or should not listen to music, whether or should not listen to music, whether or should not listen to music, whether or not you should use things like or not you should use things like or not you should use things like binaural beats and if so, what frequency binaural beats and if so, what frequency binaural beats and if so, what frequency of binaural beats. We are going to cover of binaural beats. We are going to cover of binaural beats. We are going to cover all of that and by the end, you will all of that and by the end, you will all of that and by the end, you will have a checklist of things that you can have a checklist of things that you can have a checklist of things that you can do to optimize your workspace on any do to optimize your workspace on any do to optimize your workspace on any budget. I will mention various products budget. I will mention various products budget. I will mention various products and apps that some of you might find and apps that some of you might find and apps that some of you might find useful for optimizing your workspace, useful for optimizing your workspace, useful for optimizing your workspace, but I want to emphasize at the outset but I want to emphasize at the outset but I want to emphasize at the outset that none of those that I mention are that none of those that I mention are that none of those that I mention are any products or apps that we have a any products or apps that we have a any products or apps that we have a financial relationship to and more financial relationship to and more financial relationship to and more importantly, you don't need them. I'm importantly, you don't need them. I'm importantly, you don't need them. I'm going to explain how for zero cost, you going to explain how for zero cost, you going to explain how for zero cost, you can arrange your workspace in ways that can arrange your workspace in ways that can arrange your workspace in ways that makes you maximally productive, makes you maximally productive, makes you maximally productive, maximally focused and allows you to maximally focused and allows you to maximally focused and allows you to adapt your workspace to different adapt your workspace to different adapt your workspace to different environments, whether or not you're environments, whether or not you're environments, whether or not you're traveling, working with others, working traveling, working with others, working traveling, working with others, working alone, etc. Just to give you a little alone, etc. Just to give you a little alone, etc. Just to give you a little hint of where we are going, I will hint of where we are going, I will hint of where we are going, I will mention a zero-cost app that will mention a zero-cost app that will mention a zero-cost app that will deliver binaural beats at a particular deliver binaural beats at a particular deliver binaural beats at a particular frequency that peer-reviewed research frequency that peer-reviewed research frequency that peer-reviewed research has shown can enhance certain types of has shown can enhance certain types of has shown can enhance certain types of learning and memory. However, learning and memory. However, learning and memory. However, peer-reviewed research also shows that peer-reviewed research also shows that peer-reviewed research also shows that it can diminish performance in other it can diminish performance in other it can diminish performance in other types of tasks. So, stay tuned, we'll go types of tasks. So, stay tuned, we'll go types of tasks. So, stay tuned, we'll go into all the details so that you can into all the details so that you can into all the details so that you can optimize your workspace for zero cost optimize your workspace for zero cost optimize your workspace for zero cost and get the most out of your efforts and get the most out of your efforts and get the most out of your efforts and endeavors. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has Element is an electrolyte drink that has Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and none of the everything you need and none of the everything you need and none of the things you don't. And when we say things you don't. And when we say things you don't. And when we say everything you need, the main one is everything you need, the main one is everything you need, the main one is salt. Now, salt, aka sodium, has kind of salt. Now, salt, aka sodium, has kind of salt. Now, salt, aka sodium, has kind of a bad rap. We've all heard that too much a bad rap. We've all heard that too much a bad rap. We've all heard that too much salt is bad for us. However, if you look salt is bad for us. However, if you look salt is bad for us. However, if you look into the research on salt, and in fact, into the research on salt, and in fact, into the research on salt, and in fact, if you go to one of the highest-level if you go to one of the highest-level if you go to one of the highest-level peer-reviewed scientific publication, peer-reviewed scientific publication, peer-reviewed scientific publication, Science Magazine, you can find a review Science Magazine, you can find a review Science Magazine, you can find a review article in Science some years ago that article in Science some years ago that article in Science some years ago that shows that most of what we think and shows that most of what we think and shows that most of what we think and understand about the science of salt is understand about the science of salt is understand about the science of salt is completely wrong. And in fact, salt does completely wrong. And in fact, salt does completely wrong. And in fact, salt does a number of things that's extremely a number of things that's extremely a number of things that's extremely important. For instance, our neurons, important. For instance, our neurons, important. For instance, our neurons, which signal to one another through which signal to one another through which signal to one another through electricity and through chemical electricity and through chemical electricity and through chemical signaling, critically rely on having signaling, critically rely on having signaling, critically rely on having enough sodium in order to generate what enough sodium in order to generate what enough sodium in order to generate what we call action potentials or electrical we call action potentials or electrical we call action potentials or electrical firing of neurons. If your sodium levels firing of neurons. If your sodium levels firing of neurons. If your sodium levels are too low, your neurons simply won't are too low, your neurons simply won't are too low, your neurons simply won't work. One of the main deficits from work. One of the main deficits from work. One of the main deficits from being dehydrated is lack of sodium, not being dehydrated is lack of sodium, not being dehydrated is lack of sodium, not just lack of water. just lack of water. just lack of water. Getting sufficient sodium does a number Getting sufficient sodium does a number Getting sufficient sodium does a number of things that's very important. It can of things that's very important. It can of things that's very important. It can raise your blood volume, it can help you raise your blood volume, it can help you raise your blood volume, it can help you retain water in a healthy way, not retain water in a healthy way, not retain water in a healthy way, not excess amounts. It allows neurons to excess amounts. It allows neurons to excess amounts. It allows neurons to fire for sake of thinking, for sake of fire for sake of thinking, for sake of fire for sake of thinking, for sake of athletic performance, and so on. Other athletic performance, and so on. Other athletic performance, and so on. Other electrolytes that are in Element are electrolytes that are in Element are electrolytes that are in Element are things like magnesium and potassium, things like magnesium and potassium, things like magnesium and potassium, which are also essential for neuronal which are also essential for neuronal which are also essential for neuronal function, and indeed all organ function. function, and indeed all organ function. function, and indeed all organ function. Element has a lot of salt, some Element has a lot of salt, some Element has a lot of salt, some magnesium, and some potassium. So, magnesium, and some potassium. So, magnesium, and some potassium. So, unless you're somebody who really has unless you're somebody who really has unless you're somebody who really has chronic hypertension, elevating your chronic hypertension, elevating your chronic hypertension, elevating your level of salt intake can often be level of salt intake can often be level of salt intake can often be beneficial. You should check with your beneficial. You should check with your beneficial. You should check with your doctor, but indeed it can often be doctor, but indeed it can often be doctor, but indeed it can often be beneficial. Element contains a beneficial. Element contains a beneficial. Element contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of science-backed electrolyte ratio of science-backed electrolyte ratio of 1,000 mg. That's 1 g of sodium, 200 mg 1,000 mg. That's 1 g of sodium, 200 mg 1,000 mg. That's 1 g of sodium, 200 mg of potassium, and 60 mg of magnesium. It of potassium, and 60 mg of magnesium. It of potassium, and 60 mg of magnesium. It tastes delicious. I happen to like the tastes delicious. I happen to like the tastes delicious. I happen to like the raspberry or citrus flavors. In fact, I raspberry or citrus flavors. In fact, I raspberry or citrus flavors. In fact, I like all of the flavors. Put in some like all of the flavors. Put in some like all of the flavors. Put in some water. You can make it as You can make it as You can make it as dense, meaning as high concentration as dense, meaning as high concentration as dense, meaning as high concentration as you like. So, some people will put it in you like. So, some people will put it in you like. So, some people will put it in 8 oz of water. I like mine in about 16 8 oz of water. I like mine in about 16 8 oz of water. I like mine in about 16 oz of water, and I'll drink that before oz of water, and I'll drink that before oz of water, and I'll drink that before and after exercise. And I usually will and after exercise. And I usually will and after exercise. And I usually will have another one throughout the day, have another one throughout the day, have another one throughout the day, just sip on it as I'm doing work and so just sip on it as I'm doing work and so just sip on it as I'm doing work and so forth. If you'd like to try Element, you forth. If you'd like to try Element, you forth. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklmn.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack. You to claim a free Element sample pack. You to claim a free Element sample pack. You only cover the cost of shipping. Again, only cover the cost of shipping. Again, only cover the cost of shipping. Again, that's drinkelement, that's drinkelement, that's drinkelement, drinklmn.com/huberman, to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens, now referred to as AG1. Athletic Greens, now referred to as AG1. Athletic Greens, now referred to as AG1. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're and so I'm delighted that they're and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I sponsoring the podcast. The reason I sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I still take AG1 once or twice a day, is still take AG1 once or twice a day, is still take AG1 once or twice a day, is that it helps me meet all of my that it helps me meet all of my that it helps me meet all of my foundational vitamin, mineral, and foundational vitamin, mineral, and foundational vitamin, mineral, and probiotic needs. And when people ask me, probiotic needs. And when people ask me, probiotic needs. And when people ask me, "What's the one supplement I should "What's the one supplement I should "What's the one supplement I should take?" If they were to only take one take?" If they were to only take one take?" If they were to only take one supplement, I always recommend AG1 for supplement, I always recommend AG1 for supplement, I always recommend AG1 for the simple reason that the simple reason that the simple reason that the vitamins, the minerals, and the vitamins, the minerals, and the vitamins, the minerals, and the probiotics support metabolic health, probiotics support metabolic health, probiotics support metabolic health, they support endocrine health, they support endocrine health, they support endocrine health, they support brain health, and the probiotics support brain health, and the probiotics support brain health, and the probiotics and prebiotics in there in particular and prebiotics in there in particular and prebiotics in there in particular support the so-called gut-brain axis. support the so-called gut-brain axis. support the so-called gut-brain axis. There is now a plethora of data There is now a plethora of data There is now a plethora of data supporting the fact that when we have a supporting the fact that when we have a supporting the fact that when we have a healthy gut microbiome, that is little healthy gut microbiome, that is little healthy gut microbiome, that is little microbes that live in our gut that are microbes that live in our gut that are microbes that live in our gut that are good for us, our gut signals to our good for us, our gut signals to our good for us, our gut signals to our brain and our brain signals back to our brain and our brain signals back to our brain and our brain signals back to our gut in ways that support our immune gut in ways that support our immune gut in ways that support our immune system, our digestion, even our mood. system, our digestion, even our mood. system, our digestion, even our mood. They can even support healthy levels of They can even support healthy levels of They can even support healthy levels of dopamine signaling, an important dopamine signaling, an important dopamine signaling, an important molecule for motivation and high levels molecule for motivation and high levels molecule for motivation and high levels of mood or positive mood. If you'd like of mood or positive mood. If you'd like of mood or positive mood. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to try Athletic Greens, you can go to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. to claim a special offer. to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs They'll give you five free travel packs They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 K2 has been shown to be Vitamin D3 K2 has been shown to be Vitamin D3 K2 has been shown to be important for metabolic health, important for metabolic health, important for metabolic health, endocrine health, and K2 in particular endocrine health, and K2 in particular endocrine health, and K2 in particular for heart health and regulating for heart health and regulating for heart health and regulating appropriate amounts of calcium in your appropriate amounts of calcium in your appropriate amounts of calcium in your bones. Again, go to bones. Again, go to bones. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer. Today's to claim the special offer. Today's to claim the special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive device Theragun is a handheld percussive device Theragun is a handheld percussive device that releases deep muscle tension. I was that releases deep muscle tension. I was that releases deep muscle tension. I was first introduced to Theragun on a shark first introduced to Theragun on a shark first introduced to Theragun on a shark diving trip. We were way out in the diving trip. We were way out in the diving trip. We were way out in the Pacific filming great white sharks for Pacific filming great white sharks for Pacific filming great white sharks for my laboratory where we study fear. my laboratory where we study fear. my laboratory where we study fear. And everyone was diving all day carrying And everyone was diving all day carrying And everyone was diving all day carrying what are called Pelican cases, which what are called Pelican cases, which what are called Pelican cases, which aren't actual Pelicans with wings, but aren't actual Pelicans with wings, but aren't actual Pelicans with wings, but cases for these cameras. They're very cases for these cameras. They're very cases for these cameras. They're very heavy. We're moving things all day. heavy. We're moving things all day. heavy. We're moving things all day. We're working really hard. We're working really hard. We're working really hard. We got really sore. I got particularly We got really sore. I got particularly We got really sore. I got particularly sore from all that physical labor. sore from all that physical labor. sore from all that physical labor. Someone brought a Theragun along. I'd Someone brought a Theragun along. I'd Someone brought a Theragun along. I'd never seen one of these things before or never seen one of these things before or never seen one of these things before or tried one, and I spent the rest of the tried one, and I spent the rest of the tried one, and I spent the rest of the trip trying to get as much time with the trip trying to get as much time with the trip trying to get as much time with the Theragun as I could, at least when I was Theragun as I could, at least when I was Theragun as I could, at least when I was on board the boat. With Theragun, you on board the boat. With Theragun, you on board the boat. With Theragun, you can get what is effectively a deep can get what is effectively a deep can get what is effectively a deep tissue massage to any area of your body, tissue massage to any area of your body, tissue massage to any area of your body, and you can just do that for minutes or and you can just do that for minutes or and you can just do that for minutes or hours, for as long as you like. It's hours, for as long as you like. It's hours, for as long as you like. It's really wonderful. If you have someone really wonderful. If you have someone really wonderful. If you have someone else there who's willing to use the else there who's willing to use the else there who's willing to use the Theragun on hard-to-reach places like Theragun on hard-to-reach places like Theragun on hard-to-reach places like your back, that's even better. Whether your back, that's even better. Whether your back, that's even better. Whether or not you want to treat muscle tension or not you want to treat muscle tension or not you want to treat muscle tension from working out, an injury, or just from working out, an injury, or just from working out, an injury, or just deal with daily stress from everyday deal with daily stress from everyday deal with daily stress from everyday life, there's really no substitute for life, there's really no substitute for life, there's really no substitute for the Theragun. You know, professional the Theragun. You know, professional the Theragun. You know, professional massage is wonderful, but a professional massage is wonderful, but a professional massage is wonderful, but a professional massage, of course, involves going to a massage, of course, involves going to a massage, of course, involves going to a masseuse. It's quite expensive often, masseuse. It's quite expensive often, masseuse. It's quite expensive often, etc. If you're interested in getting a If you're interested in getting a If you're interested in getting a Theragun, they start at only $199. Theragun, they start at only $199. Theragun, they start at only $199. You can go to theragun.com/huberman You can go to theragun.com/huberman You can go to theragun.com/huberman right now to get your Gen 4 Theragun right now to get your Gen 4 Theragun right now to get your Gen 4 Theragun today. You have a 30-day money-back today. You have a 30-day money-back today. You have a 30-day money-back guarantee. That's theragun.com/huberman. guarantee. That's theragun.com/huberman. guarantee. That's theragun.com/huberman. Let's talk about workspace optimization. Let's talk about workspace optimization. Let's talk about workspace optimization. This is a topic that's intrigued me for This is a topic that's intrigued me for This is a topic that's intrigued me for a very long time a very long time a very long time because my undergraduate advisor, my because my undergraduate advisor, my because my undergraduate advisor, my graduate advisor, and my post-doc graduate advisor, and my post-doc graduate advisor, and my post-doc advisor had many things in common, including had many things in common, including had many things in common, including being great scientists, being kind being great scientists, being kind being great scientists, being kind people, and terrific mentors, but they people, and terrific mentors, but they people, and terrific mentors, but they had another thing in common, which had another thing in common, which had another thing in common, which always perplexed me, which is that their always perplexed me, which is that their always perplexed me, which is that their offices were a complete disaster. They offices were a complete disaster. They offices were a complete disaster. They had mountains of books, mountains of had mountains of books, mountains of had mountains of books, mountains of papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff, and yet all of them were extremely and yet all of them were extremely and yet all of them were extremely productive and could remain extremely productive and could remain extremely productive and could remain extremely focused in that incredibly cluttered focused in that incredibly cluttered focused in that incredibly cluttered environment. Now, I'm somebody who doesn't like Now, I'm somebody who doesn't like Now, I'm somebody who doesn't like clutter. I find it very hard to focus in clutter. I find it very hard to focus in clutter. I find it very hard to focus in cluttered environments. And indeed, cluttered environments. And indeed, cluttered environments. And indeed, there's tremendous variation among there's tremendous variation among there's tremendous variation among people as to whether or not they can remain as to whether or not they can remain as to whether or not they can remain focused or whether or not they struggle focused or whether or not they struggle focused or whether or not they struggle to focus in physically cluttered to focus in physically cluttered to focus in physically cluttered environments. There's no right or wrong to this, but There's no right or wrong to this, but There's no right or wrong to this, but the question we should ask ourselves is the question we should ask ourselves is the question we should ask ourselves is why were they all able to be so focused? why were they all able to be so focused? why were they all able to be so focused? And it turns out that the reason they And it turns out that the reason they And it turns out that the reason they were able to be so focused is that they were able to be so focused is that they were able to be so focused is that they all captured one single and yet all captured one single and yet all captured one single and yet fundamental variable of workspace fundamental variable of workspace fundamental variable of workspace optimization. And we'll talk about what optimization. And we'll talk about what optimization. And we'll talk about what that variable is. In fact, we're going that variable is. In fact, we're going that variable is. In fact, we're going to talk about what all the variables of to talk about what all the variables of to talk about what all the variables of optimizing a workspace are. Things like optimizing a workspace are. Things like optimizing a workspace are. Things like vision, things like light, things like vision, things like light, things like vision, things like light, things like noise in the room, whether or not you noise in the room, whether or not you noise in the room, whether or not you listen to music or not, whether or not listen to music or not, whether or not listen to music or not, whether or not you use noise-canceling headphones or you use noise-canceling headphones or you use noise-canceling headphones or not. We're going to talk about all of not. We're going to talk about all of not. We're going to talk about all of that. And we're going to do that in a that. And we're going to do that in a that. And we're going to do that in a way that you can optimize your workspace way that you can optimize your workspace way that you can optimize your workspace regardless of whether or not you are at regardless of whether or not you are at regardless of whether or not you are at home, whether or not you're on the road, home, whether or not you're on the road, home, whether or not you're on the road, etc. Because the last thing I would ever etc. Because the last thing I would ever etc. Because the last thing I would ever want to do is to create a situation want to do is to create a situation want to do is to create a situation where you find the optimal workspace and where you find the optimal workspace and where you find the optimal workspace and then you are a slave to that optimal then you are a slave to that optimal then you are a slave to that optimal workspace. That's just not the way the workspace. That's just not the way the workspace. That's just not the way the world works. What you want to do, or my world works. What you want to do, or my world works. What you want to do, or my goal for you rather, is that you will goal for you rather, is that you will goal for you rather, is that you will have a short checklist of things that have a short checklist of things that have a short checklist of things that you can look to anytime you sit down to you can look to anytime you sit down to you can look to anytime you sit down to do work, and you can think about the do work, and you can think about the do work, and you can think about the underlying variables that impact your underlying variables that impact your underlying variables that impact your brain and your body, and allow your brain and your body, and allow your brain and your body, and allow your brain and body to get into the optimal brain and body to get into the optimal brain and body to get into the optimal state in order to learn, in order to be state in order to learn, in order to be state in order to learn, in order to be productive, and indeed to move through productive, and indeed to move through productive, and indeed to move through your work bouts in a very relaxed and your work bouts in a very relaxed and your work bouts in a very relaxed and pleasurable way while maintaining focus, pleasurable way while maintaining focus, pleasurable way while maintaining focus, and while pursuing any of the number of and while pursuing any of the number of and while pursuing any of the number of things that you're doing. The first things that you're doing. The first things that you're doing. The first variable we want to think about in terms variable we want to think about in terms variable we want to think about in terms of workspace optimization is vision and of workspace optimization is vision and of workspace optimization is vision and light. Now, in a previous episode of the light. Now, in a previous episode of the light. Now, in a previous episode of the Huberman Lab podcast devoted all to Huberman Lab podcast devoted all to Huberman Lab podcast devoted all to habits, I talked about the importance of habits, I talked about the importance of habits, I talked about the importance of dividing your 24-hour day into three dividing your 24-hour day into three dividing your 24-hour day into three different phases. And for those of you different phases. And for those of you different phases. And for those of you that haven't heard that episode, I'm that haven't heard that episode, I'm that haven't heard that episode, I'm just going to briefly summarize what I just going to briefly summarize what I just going to briefly summarize what I described. From the time you wake up in the morning From the time you wake up in the morning From the time you wake up in the morning until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, until about 6:00 or 7:00 or 8:00, sometimes 9 hours later, your brain is sometimes 9 hours later, your brain is sometimes 9 hours later, your brain is in a unique state. It is in a state of in a unique state. It is in a state of in a unique state. It is in a state of high levels of dopamine, a high levels of dopamine, a high levels of dopamine, a neuromodulator, and high levels of neuromodulator, and high levels of neuromodulator, and high levels of epinephrine, as well as hormones like epinephrine, as well as hormones like epinephrine, as well as hormones like cortisol and so forth. Without going cortisol and so forth. Without going cortisol and so forth. Without going into the biology of those things, they into the biology of those things, they into the biology of those things, they set your brain into a state of high set your brain into a state of high set your brain into a state of high alertness. And this is true whether or alertness. And this is true whether or alertness. And this is true whether or not you indulge in caffeine or not. I or not you indulge in caffeine or not. I or not you indulge in caffeine or not. I know some of you say, "Oh, I really know some of you say, "Oh, I really know some of you say, "Oh, I really don't wake up until the afternoon. I'm don't wake up until the afternoon. I'm don't wake up until the afternoon. I'm much more alert and focused in the much more alert and focused in the much more alert and focused in the afternoon." We will talk about that afternoon." We will talk about that afternoon." We will talk about that phase of the 24-hour day in a moment. phase of the 24-hour day in a moment. phase of the 24-hour day in a moment. But that early part of the day is a time But that early part of the day is a time But that early part of the day is a time of day in which, for sake of workspace of day in which, for sake of workspace of day in which, for sake of workspace optimization, being in a brightly lit environment can being in a brightly lit environment can being in a brightly lit environment can lend itself to optimal work throughout lend itself to optimal work throughout lend itself to optimal work throughout the day, not just during that early the day, not just during that early the day, not just during that early phase. And so, while on many episodes of phase. And so, while on many episodes of phase. And so, while on many episodes of this podcast I've also emphasized the this podcast I've also emphasized the this podcast I've also emphasized the importance of getting morning sunlight importance of getting morning sunlight importance of getting morning sunlight in your eyes within 30 to 60 minutes of in your eyes within 30 to 60 minutes of in your eyes within 30 to 60 minutes of waking, not as often, but now and again I will not as often, but now and again I will not as often, but now and again I will also mention that it's important to also mention that it's important to also mention that it's important to light your daytime environment as light your daytime environment as light your daytime environment as brightly as you safely can. brightly as you safely can. brightly as you safely can. So, if you are going to be doing work in So, if you are going to be doing work in So, if you are going to be doing work in this early, what I call phase one this early, what I call phase one this early, what I call phase one portion of your day, you want to have as portion of your day, you want to have as portion of your day, you want to have as much light and indeed as much overhead much light and indeed as much overhead much light and indeed as much overhead light shining on you as safely possible. light shining on you as safely possible. light shining on you as safely possible. Now, of course, you don't want it so Now, of course, you don't want it so Now, of course, you don't want it so bright that it's glaring and you have to bright that it's glaring and you have to bright that it's glaring and you have to squint, etc. But, you want as much light squint, etc. But, you want as much light squint, etc. But, you want as much light as is safely possible. as is safely possible. as is safely possible. And you can do that a couple of simple And you can do that a couple of simple And you can do that a couple of simple ways. One is if you do own or you're in ways. One is if you do own or you're in ways. One is if you do own or you're in an environment where you have in an environment where you have in an environment where you have overhead lights, turn on those overhead lights, turn on those overhead lights, turn on those overhead lights. What's special about overhead lights. What's special about overhead lights. What's special about overhead lights for alertness is that the neurons lights for alertness is that the neurons lights for alertness is that the neurons in our eyes, which are called melanopsin in our eyes, which are called melanopsin in our eyes, which are called melanopsin ganglion cells, that's the fancy name, ganglion cells, that's the fancy name, ganglion cells, that's the fancy name, melanopsin ganglion cells melanopsin ganglion cells melanopsin ganglion cells are mainly enriched in the lower half of are mainly enriched in the lower half of are mainly enriched in the lower half of our retinas, in our eyes, and view the our retinas, in our eyes, and view the our retinas, in our eyes, and view the upper visual field. Those neurons send upper visual field. Those neurons send upper visual field. Those neurons send little wires to an area of our little wires to an area of our little wires to an area of our hypothalamus, right above the roof of hypothalamus, right above the roof of hypothalamus, right above the roof of our mouth, that creates a state of our mouth, that creates a state of our mouth, that creates a state of alertness. Now, early in the day, we want to be as Now, early in the day, we want to be as Now, early in the day, we want to be as alert as possible. And this phase one of alert as possible. And this phase one of alert as possible. And this phase one of our circadian cycle is when we are best our circadian cycle is when we are best our circadian cycle is when we are best at doing analytic, detail type work. So, at doing analytic, detail type work. So, at doing analytic, detail type work. So, we're going to go into other aspects of we're going to go into other aspects of we're going to go into other aspects of workspace optimization that are workspace optimization that are workspace optimization that are important for phase one. But, during important for phase one. But, during important for phase one. But, during phase one, again, within zero to about phase one, again, within zero to about phase one, again, within zero to about eight or nine hours after waking, bright eight or nine hours after waking, bright eight or nine hours after waking, bright lights in your environment, in lights in your environment, in lights in your environment, in particular overhead lights, are going to particular overhead lights, are going to particular overhead lights, are going to facilitate focus. They're going to facilitate focus. They're going to facilitate focus. They're going to facilitate further release of things facilitate further release of things facilitate further release of things like dopamine and norepinephrine and like dopamine and norepinephrine and like dopamine and norepinephrine and healthy amounts of cortisol. And we want healthy amounts of cortisol. And we want healthy amounts of cortisol. And we want that to happen early in the day for a that to happen early in the day for a that to happen early in the day for a variety of reasons. For instance, we variety of reasons. For instance, we variety of reasons. For instance, we don't want that cortisol peak to happen don't want that cortisol peak to happen don't want that cortisol peak to happen too late in the day. That's actually too late in the day. That's actually too late in the day. That's actually associated with depression and insomnia associated with depression and insomnia associated with depression and insomnia and a number of things that we just and a number of things that we just and a number of things that we just don't want. So, one of the things that don't want. So, one of the things that don't want. So, one of the things that I've done for my workspace is to make I've done for my workspace is to make I've done for my workspace is to make sure that when I wake up in the morning, sure that when I wake up in the morning, sure that when I wake up in the morning, I do go get my sunlight. If the sun I do go get my sunlight. If the sun I do go get my sunlight. If the sun isn't out, I turn on as many bright isn't out, I turn on as many bright isn't out, I turn on as many bright artificial lights as I can manage or artificial lights as I can manage or artificial lights as I can manage or tolerate, and then I go get my sunlight tolerate, and then I go get my sunlight tolerate, and then I go get my sunlight exposure. But, once I set out to do some exposure. But, once I set out to do some exposure. But, once I set out to do some work, that all the overhead lights in work, that all the overhead lights in work, that all the overhead lights in that room are on, as well as lights in that room are on, as well as lights in that room are on, as well as lights in front of me. front of me. front of me. And that's again to And that's again to And that's again to heightened levels of focus and further heightened levels of focus and further heightened levels of focus and further release of these neuromodulators that I release of these neuromodulators that I release of these neuromodulators that I mentioned before, dopamine, mentioned before, dopamine, mentioned before, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. norepinephrine, and epinephrine. norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Now, the way that one could do that Now, the way that one could do that Now, the way that one could do that could be a very low-cost way of having, could be a very low-cost way of having, could be a very low-cost way of having, for instance, a desk lamp and those for instance, a desk lamp and those for instance, a desk lamp and those overhead lights. If you're somebody that overhead lights. If you're somebody that overhead lights. If you're somebody that wants to take this to the next level, wants to take this to the next level, wants to take this to the next level, you can purchase a ring light, which is you can purchase a ring light, which is you can purchase a ring light, which is I think those are mainly made for people I think those are mainly made for people I think those are mainly made for people doing selfie-type videos, um you know, doing selfie-type videos, um you know, doing selfie-type videos, um you know, for Instagram posts and things of that for Instagram posts and things of that for Instagram posts and things of that sort. Ring lights can be pretty sort. Ring lights can be pretty sort. Ring lights can be pretty cost-effective. And yet they're very cost-effective. And yet they're very cost-effective. And yet they're very bright and they have the sort of bright and they have the sort of bright and they have the sort of bright blue light that is going to optimally blue light that is going to optimally blue light that is going to optimally stimulate those melanopsin ganglion stimulate those melanopsin ganglion stimulate those melanopsin ganglion cells. So, some people I know will have cells. So, some people I know will have cells. So, some people I know will have a blue light or a bright LED on their a blue light or a bright LED on their a blue light or a bright LED on their desk in front of them. And indeed, I desk in front of them. And indeed, I desk in front of them. And indeed, I have one of these. I don't use a ring have one of these. I don't use a ring have one of these. I don't use a ring light, I use a light pad. light, I use a light pad. light, I use a light pad. The particular light pad I use I bought The particular light pad I use I bought The particular light pad I use I bought on Amazon. I can mention the brand, on Amazon. I can mention the brand, on Amazon. I can mention the brand, but again, I have no financial but again, I have no financial but again, I have no financial affiliation to them. This is the affiliation to them. This is the affiliation to them. This is the Artograph light pad. It's designed for Artograph light pad. It's designed for Artograph light pad. It's designed for drawing, and it's it says on it 930 for drawing, and it's it says on it 930 for drawing, and it's it says on it 930 lux. Lux is just a measure of lux. Lux is just a measure of lux. Lux is just a measure of brightness. So, I place that on the desk brightness. So, I place that on the desk brightness. So, I place that on the desk in front of me, and I turn it on in front of me, and I turn it on in front of me, and I turn it on essentially throughout this phase one of essentially throughout this phase one of essentially throughout this phase one of the day. Even if I walk away from the day. Even if I walk away from the day. Even if I walk away from the desk, I tend to keep it on. It doesn't desk, I tend to keep it on. It doesn't desk, I tend to keep it on. It doesn't consume that much energy. And in that consume that much energy. And in that consume that much energy. And in that way, I'm constantly being bombarded with way, I'm constantly being bombarded with way, I'm constantly being bombarded with photons that keep my levels of alertness photons that keep my levels of alertness photons that keep my levels of alertness up because the early part of the day is up because the early part of the day is up because the early part of the day is when I do the majority of that focused when I do the majority of that focused when I do the majority of that focused work. Again, you don't need the light work. Again, you don't need the light work. Again, you don't need the light pad, you can use a ring light, or you pad, you can use a ring light, or you pad, you can use a ring light, or you can simply use any kind of other lights can simply use any kind of other lights can simply use any kind of other lights that you might happen to have, that you might happen to have, that you might happen to have, artificial lights. For those of you that artificial lights. For those of you that artificial lights. For those of you that can place your desk near a window, and can place your desk near a window, and can place your desk near a window, and even better to open the window, that even better to open the window, that even better to open the window, that would be really fantastic. I don't have would be really fantastic. I don't have would be really fantastic. I don't have access to that. access to that. access to that. Why would I say open the window? Well, Why would I say open the window? Well, Why would I say open the window? Well, it turns out that sunlight is going to it turns out that sunlight is going to it turns out that sunlight is going to be the best stimulus for waking up your be the best stimulus for waking up your be the best stimulus for waking up your brain and body through this melanopsin brain and body through this melanopsin brain and body through this melanopsin to hypothalamus system. And by looking to hypothalamus system. And by looking to hypothalamus system. And by looking at sunlight through a window, it's 50, 5 at sunlight through a window, it's 50, 5 at sunlight through a window, it's 50, 5 0, times less effective than if that 0, times less effective than if that 0, times less effective than if that window were to be open, mostly because window were to be open, mostly because window were to be open, mostly because those windows filter out a lot of the those windows filter out a lot of the those windows filter out a lot of the wavelengths of blue light that are wavelengths of blue light that are wavelengths of blue light that are essential for stimulating the eyes and essential for stimulating the eyes and essential for stimulating the eyes and this wake-up signal. So, all of this is this wake-up signal. So, all of this is this wake-up signal. So, all of this is rests on the premise that we need to be rests on the premise that we need to be rests on the premise that we need to be alert in order to do our work, in alert in order to do our work, in alert in order to do our work, in particular focused work. And I've talked particular focused work. And I've talked particular focused work. And I've talked about before in the habits episode and about before in the habits episode and about before in the habits episode and I'm saying again now that first phase of I'm saying again now that first phase of I'm saying again now that first phase of the day, that first seven or eight or the day, that first seven or eight or the day, that first seven or eight or nine hours of the day is really the time nine hours of the day is really the time nine hours of the day is really the time in which our neurochemistry is primed in which our neurochemistry is primed in which our neurochemistry is primed for getting the most amount of focused, for getting the most amount of focused, for getting the most amount of focused, kind of challenging work done, where a kind of challenging work done, where a kind of challenging work done, where a lot of precision and detail is required. lot of precision and detail is required. lot of precision and detail is required. So, you want to brightly light your work So, you want to brightly light your work So, you want to brightly light your work environment during that first phase. environment during that first phase. environment during that first phase. Again, from the time you wake up, try Again, from the time you wake up, try Again, from the time you wake up, try and get sunlight, but then and get sunlight, but then and get sunlight, but then even if you're going to get exercise or even if you're going to get exercise or even if you're going to get exercise or do other things, you want to get as much do other things, you want to get as much do other things, you want to get as much bright light in your eyes as you safely bright light in your eyes as you safely bright light in your eyes as you safely can. And then you want to light your can. And then you want to light your can. And then you want to light your work environment. Now, in the afternoon, work environment. Now, in the afternoon, work environment. Now, in the afternoon, starting at about 9:00 and continuing starting at about 9:00 and continuing starting at about 9:00 and continuing until about 16 hours after waking, until about 16 hours after waking, until about 16 hours after waking, you want to start dimming the lights in you want to start dimming the lights in you want to start dimming the lights in that environment. Now, you don't want to that environment. Now, you don't want to that environment. Now, you don't want to make it dark because you don't want to make it dark because you don't want to make it dark because you don't want to get sleepy at 2:00 in the afternoon get sleepy at 2:00 in the afternoon get sleepy at 2:00 in the afternoon unless you're going to take a brief nap, unless you're going to take a brief nap, unless you're going to take a brief nap, which I do and is perfectly fine as long which I do and is perfectly fine as long which I do and is perfectly fine as long as it doesn't interfere with your as it doesn't interfere with your as it doesn't interfere with your nighttime sleep. But, the idea is that nighttime sleep. But, the idea is that nighttime sleep. But, the idea is that in this so-called phase two of the in this so-called phase two of the in this so-called phase two of the 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 24-hour cycle, from about 9:00 to 16 hours after waking, after waking, after waking, you want to bring the level of lights you want to bring the level of lights you want to bring the level of lights down a bit. And when I say down, I down a bit. And when I say down, I down a bit. And when I say down, I literally mean down. Having lights that literally mean down. Having lights that literally mean down. Having lights that are in front of you is fine, but are in front of you is fine, but are in front of you is fine, but overhead lights at that time are not overhead lights at that time are not overhead lights at that time are not going to be optimal for the sorts of going to be optimal for the sorts of going to be optimal for the sorts of neurochemical states that your brain neurochemical states that your brain neurochemical states that your brain wants to be in. The states that I'm wants to be in. The states that I'm wants to be in. The states that I'm referring to are a shift from the referring to are a shift from the referring to are a shift from the dopamine and norepinephrine that's dopamine and norepinephrine that's dopamine and norepinephrine that's highest early in the day, to increases highest early in the day, to increases highest early in the day, to increases in things like serotonin and other in things like serotonin and other in things like serotonin and other neuromodulators that put your brain into neuromodulators that put your brain into neuromodulators that put your brain into a state that's better for creative a state that's better for creative a state that's better for creative endeavors or for more abstract thinking. endeavors or for more abstract thinking. endeavors or for more abstract thinking. Now, as we'll soon see, there are other Now, as we'll soon see, there are other Now, as we'll soon see, there are other things you can do to improve creative things you can do to improve creative things you can do to improve creative thinking and abstract thinking. And in thinking and abstract thinking. And in thinking and abstract thinking. And in fact, there are things you can do to fact, there are things you can do to fact, there are things you can do to improve analytic thinking. We will talk improve analytic thinking. We will talk improve analytic thinking. We will talk about those, things that are distinct about those, things that are distinct about those, things that are distinct from light. But right now, we're just from light. But right now, we're just from light. But right now, we're just focusing on light. So, what I recommend focusing on light. So, what I recommend focusing on light. So, what I recommend doing and what I personally do is I will doing and what I personally do is I will doing and what I personally do is I will turn off overhead lights in the turn off overhead lights in the turn off overhead lights in the afternoon. It's not completely dim, it's afternoon. It's not completely dim, it's afternoon. It's not completely dim, it's not completely dark, but I will start to not completely dark, but I will start to not completely dark, but I will start to reduce the amount of overhead light and reduce the amount of overhead light and reduce the amount of overhead light and just simply keep the light pad on and just simply keep the light pad on and just simply keep the light pad on and whatever other lamps I happen to be whatever other lamps I happen to be whatever other lamps I happen to be using. Now, one thing we haven't talked using. Now, one thing we haven't talked using. Now, one thing we haven't talked about is screen brightness. This is about is screen brightness. This is about is screen brightness. This is highly individual. People have different highly individual. People have different highly individual. People have different retinal sensitivities. What I mean by retinal sensitivities. What I mean by retinal sensitivities. What I mean by that is everybody differs in terms of that is everybody differs in terms of that is everybody differs in terms of how bright they can tolerate their how bright they can tolerate their how bright they can tolerate their visual environment and their screen. And visual environment and their screen. And visual environment and their screen. And whether or not you are sensitive to whether or not you are sensitive to whether or not you are sensitive to light or not will depend on a lot of light or not will depend on a lot of light or not will depend on a lot of factors. Some of it is eye color. factors. Some of it is eye color. factors. Some of it is eye color. Indeed, people with darker color eyes Indeed, people with darker color eyes Indeed, people with darker color eyes generally can tolerate more bright light generally can tolerate more bright light generally can tolerate more bright light than others. than others. than others. I have green eyes. I am very, very I have green eyes. I am very, very I have green eyes. I am very, very sensitive to light. If I'm outdoors at a sensitive to light. If I'm outdoors at a sensitive to light. If I'm outdoors at a cafe or something and the table has any cafe or something and the table has any cafe or something and the table has any kind of reflective properties and it's a kind of reflective properties and it's a kind of reflective properties and it's a sunny day, I can barely see the person sunny day, I can barely see the person sunny day, I can barely see the person across the table for me unless I'm across the table for me unless I'm across the table for me unless I'm wearing sunglasses. wearing sunglasses. wearing sunglasses. Some people, Some people, Some people, other members of my family, for other members of my family, for other members of my family, for instance, have dark brown eyes and can instance, have dark brown eyes and can instance, have dark brown eyes and can just sit there and have a conversation just sit there and have a conversation just sit there and have a conversation without the need for sunglasses at all. without the need for sunglasses at all. without the need for sunglasses at all. So, that's a There's tremendous So, that's a There's tremendous So, that's a There's tremendous variation there. One or the other isn't variation there. One or the other isn't variation there. One or the other isn't healthy or advantageous necessarily. healthy or advantageous necessarily. healthy or advantageous necessarily. Just understand that you never want to Just understand that you never want to Just understand that you never want to be in an environment where it's painful be in an environment where it's painful be in an environment where it's painful to maintain to maintain to maintain looking at whatever it is that you're looking at whatever it is that you're looking at whatever it is that you're looking at. If something's painful to looking at. If something's painful to looking at. If something's painful to look at, it could be damaging to your look at, it could be damaging to your look at, it could be damaging to your eyes, so you do want to protect your eyes, so you do want to protect your eyes, so you do want to protect your eyes. Now, in this second phase of the day, Now, in this second phase of the day, Now, in this second phase of the day, since most of us are working indoors, since most of us are working indoors, since most of us are working indoors, but even if you're working outdoors, but even if you're working outdoors, but even if you're working outdoors, you want to try and get the amount of you want to try and get the amount of you want to try and get the amount of light reduced overall, but in particular light reduced overall, but in particular light reduced overall, but in particular that overhead light. And you also want that overhead light. And you also want that overhead light. And you also want to start reducing the amount of blue to start reducing the amount of blue to start reducing the amount of blue light that you're being exposed to. So, light that you're being exposed to. So, light that you're being exposed to. So, somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., somewhere around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., which for me is, you know, about 12 which for me is, you know, about 12 which for me is, you know, about 12 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake, I will turn off after I've been awake, I will turn off after I've been awake, I will turn off that light pad and start to transition that light pad and start to transition that light pad and start to transition the lights in my environment to more the lights in my environment to more the lights in my environment to more yellows and reds. Now, I can't always do yellows and reds. Now, I can't always do yellows and reds. Now, I can't always do this. I have friends that actually have this. I have friends that actually have this. I have friends that actually have converted their entire homes from blue converted their entire homes from blue converted their entire homes from blue light early in the day to red light late light early in the day to red light late light early in the day to red light late in the day. That's really cool and in the day. That's really cool and in the day. That's really cool and fantastic. I haven't done that. Uh it's, fantastic. I haven't done that. Uh it's, fantastic. I haven't done that. Uh it's, you know, there's a cost to doing that you know, there's a cost to doing that you know, there's a cost to doing that and it is optimal in terms of optimizing and it is optimal in terms of optimizing and it is optimal in terms of optimizing productivity and sleep and so forth, but productivity and sleep and so forth, but productivity and sleep and so forth, but it's not feasible for a lot of people. it's not feasible for a lot of people. it's not feasible for a lot of people. But, what I do is I simply switch to But, what I do is I simply switch to But, what I do is I simply switch to using yellow lamps. I will turn off that using yellow lamps. I will turn off that using yellow lamps. I will turn off that LED in the later afternoon, again around LED in the later afternoon, again around LED in the later afternoon, again around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m. And I tend to wake up 4:00 or 5:00 p.m. And I tend to wake up 4:00 or 5:00 p.m. And I tend to wake up around 6:00 a.m. or so. I'll turn those around 6:00 a.m. or so. I'll turn those around 6:00 a.m. or so. I'll turn those off and what I'll try and do also is off and what I'll try and do also is off and what I'll try and do also is I'll try and dim the screen that I'm I'll try and dim the screen that I'm I'll try and dim the screen that I'm working on so that I can still manage to working on so that I can still manage to working on so that I can still manage to see everything that I need to see, but see everything that I need to see, but see everything that I need to see, but it's quite a bit dimmer than it was it's quite a bit dimmer than it was it's quite a bit dimmer than it was early in the day. So, that's phase two early in the day. So, that's phase two early in the day. So, that's phase two of the day and that's how we want to of the day and that's how we want to of the day and that's how we want to think about light. And then, I'll just think about light. And then, I'll just think about light. And then, I'll just mention because I know there are people mention because I know there are people mention because I know there are people who are working in the middle of the who are working in the middle of the who are working in the middle of the night, there's phase three, which is night, there's phase three, which is night, there's phase three, which is about 17 to 24 hours after waking. And I about 17 to 24 hours after waking. And I about 17 to 24 hours after waking. And I realize that for shift workers or for realize that for shift workers or for realize that for shift workers or for people that are pulling all-nighters or people that are pulling all-nighters or people that are pulling all-nighters or for students, often times you need to be for students, often times you need to be for students, often times you need to be awake and studying in the middle of the awake and studying in the middle of the awake and studying in the middle of the night. I myself am somebody who for night. I myself am somebody who for night. I myself am somebody who for years would pull anywhere from five to years would pull anywhere from five to years would pull anywhere from five to 10 all-nighters per year. I still pull 10 all-nighters per year. I still pull 10 all-nighters per year. I still pull an all-nighter now and again because of an all-nighter now and again because of an all-nighter now and again because of deadlines and so forth. I don't deadlines and so forth. I don't deadlines and so forth. I don't recommend it. If you can avoid it, recommend it. If you can avoid it, recommend it. If you can avoid it, great, but many people just simply have great, but many people just simply have great, but many people just simply have to do this for sake of shift work or to do this for sake of shift work or to do this for sake of shift work or because of impending deadlines or because of impending deadlines or because of impending deadlines or procrastination or all of the above. If procrastination or all of the above. If procrastination or all of the above. If you're going to be doing work in that you're going to be doing work in that you're going to be doing work in that third phase of your circadian cycle, you third phase of your circadian cycle, you third phase of your circadian cycle, you really want to limit the amount of really want to limit the amount of really want to limit the amount of bright light that you're getting in your bright light that you're getting in your bright light that you're getting in your eyes to just the amount that allows you eyes to just the amount that allows you eyes to just the amount that allows you to do the work that you're doing. to do the work that you're doing. to do the work that you're doing. Because if you get light in your eyes Because if you get light in your eyes Because if you get light in your eyes that's any brighter than that, you're that's any brighter than that, you're that's any brighter than that, you're going to severely deplete your melatonin going to severely deplete your melatonin going to severely deplete your melatonin levels. You're going to severely shift levels. You're going to severely shift levels. You're going to severely shift your circadian clock and it's your circadian clock and it's your circadian clock and it's effectively like traveling to another effectively like traveling to another effectively like traveling to another time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 time zone. So, if you stay up from 3:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until a.m. until 6:00 a.m. or 2:00 a.m. until 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or 4:00 a.m. working on a term paper or something of that sort and you're something of that sort and you're something of that sort and you're getting bright light in your eyes, getting bright light in your eyes, getting bright light in your eyes, you are effectively flying six hours to you are effectively flying six hours to you are effectively flying six hours to a different time zone. Or at least a different time zone. Or at least a different time zone. Or at least that's what your body registers it as that's what your body registers it as that's what your body registers it as and it can really throw your sleep and it can really throw your sleep and it can really throw your sleep and your metabolism and a number of other your metabolism and a number of other your metabolism and a number of other things out of whack. things out of whack. things out of whack. Now, there's an exception to this, which Now, there's an exception to this, which Now, there's an exception to this, which is if you really want to be awake, it is if you really want to be awake, it is if you really want to be awake, it can often be beneficial to flipping on can often be beneficial to flipping on can often be beneficial to flipping on all the lights in the room and keeping all the lights in the room and keeping all the lights in the room and keeping them really bright. One of the hardest them really bright. One of the hardest them really bright. One of the hardest things to do is to stay up all night things to do is to stay up all night things to do is to stay up all night studying when you're in a dim studying when you're in a dim studying when you're in a dim environment. So, you have to determine environment. So, you have to determine environment. So, you have to determine the trade-off between whether or not you the trade-off between whether or not you the trade-off between whether or not you want to shift your clock or whether or want to shift your clock or whether or want to shift your clock or whether or not you want to get the work done. And I not you want to get the work done. And I not you want to get the work done. And I would say the ideal situation is to would say the ideal situation is to would say the ideal situation is to sleep at night and to do your work sleep at night and to do your work sleep at night and to do your work during the day and in the afternoon, but during the day and in the afternoon, but during the day and in the afternoon, but if you do have to be awake in the middle if you do have to be awake in the middle if you do have to be awake in the middle of the night, do understand that you of the night, do understand that you of the night, do understand that you want to dim those lights overall. You want to dim those lights overall. You want to dim those lights overall. You would not want to use that LED. You would not want to use that LED. You would not want to use that LED. You would not want overhead lights on unless would not want overhead lights on unless would not want overhead lights on unless you're really struggling to stay awake, you're really struggling to stay awake, you're really struggling to stay awake, in which case you want to get as many in which case you want to get as many in which case you want to get as many bright lights on as possible. So, there bright lights on as possible. So, there bright lights on as possible. So, there are a couple tricks to all-nighters. I are a couple tricks to all-nighters. I are a couple tricks to all-nighters. I don't really want people pulling don't really want people pulling don't really want people pulling all-nighters unless they have to, but all-nighters unless they have to, but all-nighters unless they have to, but there are a few things that you can do there are a few things that you can do there are a few things that you can do without taking stimulants in order to without taking stimulants in order to without taking stimulants in order to stay up all night that can be beneficial stay up all night that can be beneficial stay up all night that can be beneficial that maximize on your biology. One of that maximize on your biology. One of that maximize on your biology. One of them that's a little less uh commonly them that's a little less uh commonly them that's a little less uh commonly known is you can drink 32 oz of water known is you can drink 32 oz of water known is you can drink 32 oz of water and commit to not going to the bathroom and commit to not going to the bathroom and commit to not going to the bathroom for 90 minutes at least. Turns out that for 90 minutes at least. Turns out that for 90 minutes at least. Turns out that there is a circuit that goes from your there is a circuit that goes from your there is a circuit that goes from your bladder, literally neurons that go from bladder, literally neurons that go from bladder, literally neurons that go from your bladder to your brainstem, and when your bladder to your brainstem, and when your bladder to your brainstem, and when you have to urinate, it makes you very you have to urinate, it makes you very you have to urinate, it makes you very alert, as many of you have probably alert, as many of you have probably alert, as many of you have probably experienced. This is actually what wakes experienced. This is actually what wakes experienced. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the night when we us up in the middle of the night when we us up in the middle of the night when we have to use the bathroom is this circuit have to use the bathroom is this circuit have to use the bathroom is this circuit for alertness that goes from full for alertness that goes from full for alertness that goes from full bladder. It's signaled by the bladder bladder. It's signaled by the bladder bladder. It's signaled by the bladder being full to the brainstem. And this is being full to the brainstem. And this is being full to the brainstem. And this is the circuit that is disrupted in kids the circuit that is disrupted in kids the circuit that is disrupted in kids that have bed-wetting issues. And there that have bed-wetting issues. And there that have bed-wetting issues. And there are a number of cognitive behavioral are a number of cognitive behavioral are a number of cognitive behavioral approaches to that. Sometimes approaches to that. Sometimes approaches to that. Sometimes bed-wetting in very young kids is bed-wetting in very young kids is bed-wetting in very young kids is because the circuit hasn't developed because the circuit hasn't developed because the circuit hasn't developed yet. Most adults, fortunately, are not yet. Most adults, fortunately, are not yet. Most adults, fortunately, are not bed-wetting, but you can bed-wetting, but you can bed-wetting, but you can increase the amount of alertness in your increase the amount of alertness in your increase the amount of alertness in your system and remain awake in the middle of system and remain awake in the middle of system and remain awake in the middle of the night by drinking a little bit more the night by drinking a little bit more the night by drinking a little bit more water than uh you normally would and water than uh you normally would and water than uh you normally would and then refraining from going to the then refraining from going to the then refraining from going to the restroom. That certainly will lend restroom. That certainly will lend restroom. That certainly will lend itself to alertness. You know how itself to alertness. You know how itself to alertness. You know how difficult it is to fall asleep uh when difficult it is to fall asleep uh when difficult it is to fall asleep uh when you have to use the restroom, for you have to use the restroom, for you have to use the restroom, for instance. So, that's one tool. The other instance. So, that's one tool. The other instance. So, that's one tool. The other thing is, again, to flip on as many thing is, again, to flip on as many thing is, again, to flip on as many bright lights in the environment as bright lights in the environment as bright lights in the environment as possible. And then, of course, people will rely on And then, of course, people will rely on And then, of course, people will rely on stimulants like caffeine or even more uh stimulants like caffeine or even more uh stimulants like caffeine or even more uh aggressive stimulants. That's not aggressive stimulants. That's not aggressive stimulants. That's not something I necessarily recommend. Um something I necessarily recommend. Um something I necessarily recommend. Um you'll each have to determine that for you'll each have to determine that for you'll each have to determine that for you, but if you do in fact have to use you, but if you do in fact have to use you, but if you do in fact have to use uh all-nighters for any reason, you can uh all-nighters for any reason, you can uh all-nighters for any reason, you can maximize this bladder-to-brain approach maximize this bladder-to-brain approach maximize this bladder-to-brain approach and the bright light approach. Okay, so and the bright light approach. Okay, so and the bright light approach. Okay, so that more or less covers how bright to that more or less covers how bright to that more or less covers how bright to keep your overall environment and how keep your overall environment and how keep your overall environment and how bright to keep your screen. If you bright to keep your screen. If you bright to keep your screen. If you really want to get nerdy about this, really want to get nerdy about this, really want to get nerdy about this, there is a free app called Light Meter there is a free app called Light Meter there is a free app called Light Meter where you can start measuring how many where you can start measuring how many where you can start measuring how many lux, how many photons are in a given lux, how many photons are in a given lux, how many photons are in a given environment. It's actually measuring environment. It's actually measuring environment. It's actually measuring reflectance of photons and so on. If you reflectance of photons and so on. If you reflectance of photons and so on. If you can look up what a lux meter does, if can look up what a lux meter does, if can look up what a lux meter does, if you like. you like. you like. I don't necessarily recommend doing I don't necessarily recommend doing I don't necessarily recommend doing that. I don't want to set a critical that. I don't want to set a critical that. I don't want to set a critical threshold by which, you know, for threshold by which, you know, for threshold by which, you know, for instance, we say once your environment instance, we say once your environment instance, we say once your environment is more than 1,500 lux, then it's too is more than 1,500 lux, then it's too is more than 1,500 lux, then it's too bright or not bright enough, et cetera. bright or not bright enough, et cetera. bright or not bright enough, et cetera. Everyone has different retinal Everyone has different retinal Everyone has different retinal sensitivities. Everyone will find that sensitivities. Everyone will find that sensitivities. Everyone will find that different levels of brightness will different levels of brightness will different levels of brightness will cause them to be alert, different levels cause them to be alert, different levels cause them to be alert, different levels of dimness, if you will, in the room of dimness, if you will, in the room of dimness, if you will, in the room will cause them to feel sleepy. You will cause them to feel sleepy. You will cause them to feel sleepy. You really want to just modulate across the really want to just modulate across the really want to just modulate across the 24-hour cycle where it's very bright, as 24-hour cycle where it's very bright, as 24-hour cycle where it's very bright, as bright as safely can be early in the bright as safely can be early in the bright as safely can be early in the day, so that you are alert, you can do day, so that you are alert, you can do day, so that you are alert, you can do your focused, detailed work in that your focused, detailed work in that your focused, detailed work in that first phase, and then in the afternoon, first phase, and then in the afternoon, first phase, and then in the afternoon, as you move into more creative type as you move into more creative type as you move into more creative type works or abstract thinking or working works or abstract thinking or working works or abstract thinking or working with other people in kind of a with other people in kind of a with other people in kind of a brainstorming mode, brainstorming mode, brainstorming mode, that you would shift to dimmer lights, that you would shift to dimmer lights, that you would shift to dimmer lights, yellow lights, eliminate the blue lights yellow lights, eliminate the blue lights yellow lights, eliminate the blue lights as much as possible. Now, that's light, as much as possible. Now, that's light, as much as possible. Now, that's light, but there's another aspect of vision but there's another aspect of vision but there's another aspect of vision that has been shown to be critically that has been shown to be critically that has been shown to be critically important for how alert we are going to important for how alert we are going to important for how alert we are going to be and how well we can maintain that be and how well we can maintain that be and how well we can maintain that alertness. And that has to do with where our visual And that has to do with where our visual And that has to do with where our visual focus is in a given environment. So, I'm focus is in a given environment. So, I'm focus is in a given environment. So, I'm not talking about overall brightness. not talking about overall brightness. not talking about overall brightness. What I'm referring to now is simply What I'm referring to now is simply What I'm referring to now is simply where you place your phone or your where you place your phone or your where you place your phone or your tablet or computer screen or book, tablet or computer screen or book, tablet or computer screen or book, whatever it is that you happen to be whatever it is that you happen to be whatever it is that you happen to be looking at. There's a very looking at. There's a very looking at. There's a very underappreciated and yet incredible underappreciated and yet incredible underappreciated and yet incredible aspect of our neurology that has to do aspect of our neurology that has to do aspect of our neurology that has to do with the relationship between where we with the relationship between where we with the relationship between where we look and our level of alertness. look and our level of alertness. look and our level of alertness. And it works in a very logical way. We And it works in a very logical way. We And it works in a very logical way. We have clusters of neurons in our brain have clusters of neurons in our brain have clusters of neurons in our brain stem. And those clusters of neurons And those clusters of neurons And those clusters of neurons control our eyelid muscles and they control our eyelid muscles and they control our eyelid muscles and they control our eye movements up and down control our eye movements up and down control our eye movements up and down and to the sides. And indeed, if you and to the sides. And indeed, if you and to the sides. And indeed, if you were to look at an eyeball, we've looked were to look at an eyeball, we've looked were to look at an eyeball, we've looked at a lot of eyeballs in my lab at a lot of eyeballs in my lab at a lot of eyeballs in my lab and I teach neuroanatomy, so we do this and I teach neuroanatomy, so we do this and I teach neuroanatomy, so we do this from time to time. We would see that from time to time. We would see that from time to time. We would see that there are six muscles attached to your there are six muscles attached to your there are six muscles attached to your eyeball. Now, four of them are located at the Now, four of them are located at the Now, four of them are located at the top, the bottom, and the two sides of top, the bottom, and the two sides of top, the bottom, and the two sides of your eyeball. Sort of at the 12:00, your eyeball. Sort of at the 12:00, your eyeball. Sort of at the 12:00, 6:00, 3:00, and 9:00 of your eyeball. 6:00, 3:00, and 9:00 of your eyeball. 6:00, 3:00, and 9:00 of your eyeball. And those muscles can move your eye in And those muscles can move your eye in And those muscles can move your eye in the socket from side to side and up and the socket from side to side and up and the socket from side to side and up and down. And then we also have some muscles down. And then we also have some muscles down. And then we also have some muscles that can actually pull the eyeballs at that can actually pull the eyeballs at that can actually pull the eyeballs at angles, okay? So, there's we have angles, okay? So, there's we have angles, okay? So, there's we have different muscles that can move the eyes different muscles that can move the eyes different muscles that can move the eyes at different angles as well. And that's at different angles as well. And that's at different angles as well. And that's why we can look up into the side or down why we can look up into the side or down why we can look up into the side or down into the side, not just from side to into the side, not just from side to into the side, not just from side to side or up or down. side or up or down. side or up or down. Now, the neurons that control those Now, the neurons that control those Now, the neurons that control those muscles have a very interesting feature, muscles have a very interesting feature, muscles have a very interesting feature, which is that which is that which is that when we are looking down when we are looking down when we are looking down toward the ground or anywhere below toward the ground or anywhere below toward the ground or anywhere below basically the central region of our basically the central region of our basically the central region of our face, the neurons that control that eye the neurons that control that eye the neurons that control that eye movement are intimately related to areas movement are intimately related to areas movement are intimately related to areas of the brain stem that release certain of the brain stem that release certain of the brain stem that release certain types of neuromodulators and types of neuromodulators and types of neuromodulators and neurotransmitters. And they activate areas of the brain And they activate areas of the brain And they activate areas of the brain that are associated with calm and indeed that are associated with calm and indeed that are associated with calm and indeed even with sleepiness. even with sleepiness. even with sleepiness. And there's an active inhibition or And there's an active inhibition or And there's an active inhibition or prevention of neurons that increase prevention of neurons that increase prevention of neurons that increase alertness. Now, the opposite is also alertness. Now, the opposite is also alertness. Now, the opposite is also true. We have neurons that place our true. We have neurons that place our true. We have neurons that place our eyes into an upward gaze above the sort eyes into an upward gaze above the sort eyes into an upward gaze above the sort of level of our nose and up above our of level of our nose and up above our of level of our nose and up above our forehead, literally looking up while forehead, literally looking up while forehead, literally looking up while keeping the head stationary. Or if you keeping the head stationary. Or if you keeping the head stationary. Or if you tilt your head back and you look up, tilt your head back and you look up, tilt your head back and you look up, these neurons are still active. these neurons are still active. these neurons are still active. Those neurons don't just control the Those neurons don't just control the Those neurons don't just control the position of the eyes and cause them to position of the eyes and cause them to position of the eyes and cause them to move up, they also trigger the move up, they also trigger the move up, they also trigger the activation of brain circuits that are activation of brain circuits that are activation of brain circuits that are associated with alertness. associated with alertness. associated with alertness. Now, this is a fundamental feature of Now, this is a fundamental feature of Now, this is a fundamental feature of the way that our eyes and brain are the way that our eyes and brain are the way that our eyes and brain are wired together and how they relate to wired together and how they relate to wired together and how they relate to what we call autonomic arousal. And what we call autonomic arousal. And what we call autonomic arousal. And there are a bunch of details there. We there are a bunch of details there. We there are a bunch of details there. We will actually have a guest in a few will actually have a guest in a few will actually have a guest in a few weeks who has learned to exploit these weeks who has learned to exploit these weeks who has learned to exploit these neurons and the fact that they control neurons and the fact that they control neurons and the fact that they control these different states of calm or these different states of calm or these different states of calm or alertness in order to generate hypnotic alertness in order to generate hypnotic alertness in order to generate hypnotic states, to place people into very states, to place people into very states, to place people into very atypical states in which they are both atypical states in which they are both atypical states in which they are both very alert and very calm. very alert and very calm. very alert and very calm. We'll save that for a future episode, We'll save that for a future episode, We'll save that for a future episode, but the important thing to understand is the important thing to understand is the important thing to understand is when you are looking down below the when you are looking down below the when you are looking down below the level of your nose, you are essentially level of your nose, you are essentially level of your nose, you are essentially decelerating your alertness. You're decelerating your alertness. You're decelerating your alertness. You're reducing your amount of alertness. It reducing your amount of alertness. It reducing your amount of alertness. It might be subtle, but it's happening. might be subtle, but it's happening. might be subtle, but it's happening. Whereas when you look straight ahead or Whereas when you look straight ahead or Whereas when you look straight ahead or in particular when you look up, you're in particular when you look up, you're in particular when you look up, you're increasing your level of alertness. Now, increasing your level of alertness. Now, increasing your level of alertness. Now, this has some obvious implications when this has some obvious implications when this has some obvious implications when we get sleepy, our eyelids tend to close we get sleepy, our eyelids tend to close we get sleepy, our eyelids tend to close and we tend to nod down. When we're wide and we tend to nod down. When we're wide and we tend to nod down. When we're wide awake, we tend to be wide-eyed, our awake, we tend to be wide-eyed, our awake, we tend to be wide-eyed, our we don't tend to blink as often, and we don't tend to blink as often, and we don't tend to blink as often, and we tend to be chin up and kind of on tend to be chin up and kind of on tend to be chin up and kind of on vigilance and alertness. So, this has a vigilance and alertness. So, this has a vigilance and alertness. So, this has a evolutionary or at least an adaptive evolutionary or at least an adaptive evolutionary or at least an adaptive component to it. component to it. component to it. This can be exploited and indeed it's This can be exploited and indeed it's This can be exploited and indeed it's been researched in terms of how it can been researched in terms of how it can been researched in terms of how it can be used to optimize work environments. be used to optimize work environments. be used to optimize work environments. Contrary to what most people do, which Contrary to what most people do, which Contrary to what most people do, which is to look down at their laptop, tablet, is to look down at their laptop, tablet, is to look down at their laptop, tablet, or phone, if you want to be alert and or phone, if you want to be alert and or phone, if you want to be alert and you want to maintain the maximum amount you want to maintain the maximum amount you want to maintain the maximum amount of focus for whatever it is that you're of focus for whatever it is that you're of focus for whatever it is that you're reading or doing, you want that screen reading or doing, you want that screen reading or doing, you want that screen or whatever it is that you're looking at or whatever it is that you're looking at or whatever it is that you're looking at to at least be at eye level and ideally to at least be at eye level and ideally to at least be at eye level and ideally slightly above it. slightly above it. slightly above it. Now, I haven't seen many workspaces that Now, I haven't seen many workspaces that Now, I haven't seen many workspaces that take advantage of this very hardwired take advantage of this very hardwired take advantage of this very hardwired neurobiological fact. So, what should neurobiological fact. So, what should neurobiological fact. So, what should you do with this information? Well, if you do with this information? Well, if you do with this information? Well, if you're somebody who sits down to do work you're somebody who sits down to do work you're somebody who sits down to do work and starts to feel sleepy or simply and starts to feel sleepy or simply and starts to feel sleepy or simply unfocused, unable to attend unfocused, unable to attend unfocused, unable to attend to whatever it is that you're doing, I to whatever it is that you're doing, I to whatever it is that you're doing, I highly recommend that you take your highly recommend that you take your highly recommend that you take your laptop or tablet. I do hope that most laptop or tablet. I do hope that most laptop or tablet. I do hope that most people aren't doing serious work on people aren't doing serious work on people aren't doing serious work on their phones because it's such a small their phones because it's such a small their phones because it's such a small visual window and we can talk about why visual window and we can talk about why visual window and we can talk about why that's an issue later. that's an issue later. that's an issue later. And the idea would be to place that And the idea would be to place that And the idea would be to place that screen of your tablet or your screen of your tablet or your screen of your tablet or your laptop or other computer and try and get laptop or other computer and try and get laptop or other computer and try and get it elevated at least to nose level, your it elevated at least to nose level, your it elevated at least to nose level, your nose level, or even higher. Now, I nose level, or even higher. Now, I nose level, or even higher. Now, I realize that can be complicated to do. realize that can be complicated to do. realize that can be complicated to do. I've long just used a stack of books or I've long just used a stack of books or I've long just used a stack of books or I'll sometimes take a box and turn it I'll sometimes take a box and turn it I'll sometimes take a box and turn it upside down and set it there. I do use a upside down and set it there. I do use a upside down and set it there. I do use a mixed standing seated desk. I'll talk mixed standing seated desk. I'll talk mixed standing seated desk. I'll talk about that in a few minutes. about that in a few minutes. about that in a few minutes. There are a number of different ways There are a number of different ways There are a number of different ways that you could do this. You could wall that you could do this. You could wall that you could do this. You could wall mount a monitor. I think many people are mount a monitor. I think many people are mount a monitor. I think many people are working with laptops. It's a little bit working with laptops. It's a little bit working with laptops. It's a little bit harder to do that with a laptop. Some harder to do that with a laptop. Some harder to do that with a laptop. Some people though will configure a second people though will configure a second people though will configure a second screen. You have to decide what's right screen. You have to decide what's right screen. You have to decide what's right for you and your budget. But, again, in for you and your budget. But, again, in for you and your budget. But, again, in addition to having a brightly lit room addition to having a brightly lit room addition to having a brightly lit room to be able to focus and attend to be able to focus and attend to be able to focus and attend to whatever it is you're working on, you whatever it is you're working on, you whatever it is you're working on, you want to have that screen positioned high want to have that screen positioned high want to have that screen positioned high in your visual environment. Now, you in your visual environment. Now, you in your visual environment. Now, you wouldn't want it on the ceiling wouldn't want it on the ceiling wouldn't want it on the ceiling necessarily, although that would be necessarily, although that would be necessarily, although that would be pretty cool. Um, pretty cool. Um, pretty cool. Um, you but you do want it above you. you but you do want it above you. you but you do want it above you. Now, there are a couple solutions to Now, there are a couple solutions to Now, there are a couple solutions to this that don't involve a wall mount or this that don't involve a wall mount or this that don't involve a wall mount or stacking books or boxes. For instance, stacking books or boxes. For instance, stacking books or boxes. For instance, you could be one of those people that you could be one of those people that you could be one of those people that likes to lie in bed or on the sofa and likes to lie in bed or on the sofa and likes to lie in bed or on the sofa and get your screen up above you by putting get your screen up above you by putting get your screen up above you by putting pillows on your knees. I used to pillows on your knees. I used to pillows on your knees. I used to actually do a lot of my writing and work actually do a lot of my writing and work actually do a lot of my writing and work in the middle of the night. I don't do in the middle of the night. I don't do in the middle of the night. I don't do this anymore and I don't recommend it, this anymore and I don't recommend it, this anymore and I don't recommend it, but I used to do a lot of work from bed. but I used to do a lot of work from bed. but I used to do a lot of work from bed. Now, I no longer bring electronics Now, I no longer bring electronics Now, I no longer bring electronics for work into the bedroom. I just really for work into the bedroom. I just really for work into the bedroom. I just really try and keep the bedroom for sleeping or try and keep the bedroom for sleeping or try and keep the bedroom for sleeping or whatever else. But, in terms of lying whatever else. But, in terms of lying whatever else. But, in terms of lying down on the couch, it is somewhat easier down on the couch, it is somewhat easier down on the couch, it is somewhat easier to get that screen up above you. You can to get that screen up above you. You can to get that screen up above you. You can kind of slide underneath that screen and kind of slide underneath that screen and kind of slide underneath that screen and get typing. But, there's a problem with get typing. But, there's a problem with get typing. But, there's a problem with that and we'll talk about this a little that and we'll talk about this a little that and we'll talk about this a little bit more in a moment, but it turns out bit more in a moment, but it turns out bit more in a moment, but it turns out that your posture, literally the that your posture, literally the that your posture, literally the position of your body relative to position of your body relative to position of your body relative to gravity, also has important implications gravity, also has important implications gravity, also has important implications for how alert you are. So, ideally you for how alert you are. So, ideally you for how alert you are. So, ideally you would be standing or seated. I would say would be standing or seated. I would say would be standing or seated. I would say the ideal would be standing, second best the ideal would be standing, second best the ideal would be standing, second best would be seated. And your screen will be would be seated. And your screen will be would be seated. And your screen will be either directly in front of you or either directly in front of you or either directly in front of you or slightly above you or if you wanted to slightly above you or if you wanted to slightly above you or if you wanted to get really fancy, you could create a get really fancy, you could create a get really fancy, you could create a situation where it was above you and situation where it was above you and situation where it was above you and slightly tilted toward you so that you slightly tilted toward you so that you slightly tilted toward you so that you actually had to maintain kind of proper actually had to maintain kind of proper actually had to maintain kind of proper neck posture. This accomplishes a number neck posture. This accomplishes a number neck posture. This accomplishes a number of things. In addition to making you of things. In addition to making you of things. In addition to making you more alert, you also get away from the more alert, you also get away from the more alert, you also get away from the so-called text neck. You know, people so-called text neck. You know, people so-called text neck. You know, people are starting to look more like C's are starting to look more like C's are starting to look more like C's nowadays, the shape of the letter nowadays, the shape of the letter nowadays, the shape of the letter C because we're constantly looking down. C because we're constantly looking down. C because we're constantly looking down. I do every once in a while see somebody I do every once in a while see somebody I do every once in a while see somebody who's texting in public with it at eye who's texting in public with it at eye who's texting in public with it at eye level. It always looks a little odd that level. It always looks a little odd that level. It always looks a little odd that they're doing that, but I always admire they're doing that, but I always admire they're doing that, but I always admire their posture at the same time. So, we their posture at the same time. So, we their posture at the same time. So, we shouldn't give them a hard time. So, shouldn't give them a hard time. So, shouldn't give them a hard time. So, this is another feature that you can this is another feature that you can this is another feature that you can arrange into your physical workspace. arrange into your physical workspace. arrange into your physical workspace. Again, whether or not you're seated or Again, whether or not you're seated or Again, whether or not you're seated or you're or you're standing throughout the you're or you're standing throughout the you're or you're standing throughout the day, try and get that screen elevated. Now, try and get that screen elevated. Now, try and get that screen elevated. Now, with reference to posture, there are with reference to posture, there are with reference to posture, there are beautiful data illustrating that when we beautiful data illustrating that when we beautiful data illustrating that when we are standing up, are standing up, are standing up, those same neurons in our brainstem, those same neurons in our brainstem, those same neurons in our brainstem, locus coeruleus neurons, which release, locus coeruleus neurons, which release, locus coeruleus neurons, which release, I should mention, things like I should mention, things like I should mention, things like norepinephrine and epinephrine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, those neurons become active when we are those neurons become active when we are those neurons become active when we are standing. They become even more active standing. They become even more active standing. They become even more active when we are ambulatory, when we are when we are ambulatory, when we are when we are ambulatory, when we are moving, and we will talk about moving, and we will talk about moving, and we will talk about treadmilling and cycling at your desk treadmilling and cycling at your desk treadmilling and cycling at your desk and so forth in a little bit. But, when and so forth in a little bit. But, when and so forth in a little bit. But, when you sit, they become a little less you sit, they become a little less you sit, they become a little less active. And when you lie down, and active. And when you lie down, and active. And when you lie down, and indeed anytime that you start to get indeed anytime that you start to get indeed anytime that you start to get your feet up above your waist or your feet up above your waist or your feet up above your waist or your head tilted back, those neurons fire head tilted back, those neurons fire head tilted back, those neurons fire less and neurons in your brain that are less and neurons in your brain that are less and neurons in your brain that are involved in calming and indeed putting involved in calming and indeed putting involved in calming and indeed putting you to sleep start increasing their you to sleep start increasing their you to sleep start increasing their level of firing. It's a really beautiful level of firing. It's a really beautiful level of firing. It's a really beautiful system, so beautiful in fact that there system, so beautiful in fact that there system, so beautiful in fact that there are studies that show that as you adjust are studies that show that as you adjust are studies that show that as you adjust the angle of the body back, you actually the angle of the body back, you actually the angle of the body back, you actually get a sort of dose-dependent increase in get a sort of dose-dependent increase in get a sort of dose-dependent increase in sleepiness and calmness and a sleepiness and calmness and a sleepiness and calmness and a dose-dependent decrease in alertness. dose-dependent decrease in alertness. dose-dependent decrease in alertness. And so, And so, And so, as we were all told to sit up straight as we were all told to sit up straight as we were all told to sit up straight or even better to stand up straight, and or even better to stand up straight, and or even better to stand up straight, and now I'm also telling you to get that now I'm also telling you to get that now I'm also telling you to get that visual thing that you're attending to, visual thing that you're attending to, visual thing that you're attending to, screen or otherwise, up in front of you screen or otherwise, up in front of you screen or otherwise, up in front of you or ideally above you, those things or ideally above you, those things or ideally above you, those things combine to generate maximum alertness. combine to generate maximum alertness. combine to generate maximum alertness. So, you can think about how you might So, you can think about how you might So, you can think about how you might work this into various aspects of your work this into various aspects of your work this into various aspects of your homework environment or office work homework environment or office work homework environment or office work environment. But, as I describe this, environment. But, as I describe this, environment. But, as I describe this, many of you are probably thinking what many of you are probably thinking what many of you are probably thinking what I'm thinking, which is gosh, most of I'm thinking, which is gosh, most of I'm thinking, which is gosh, most of what we do is in complete opposite what we do is in complete opposite what we do is in complete opposite direction to all of this direction to all of this direction to all of this neurobiologically grounded advice. Most neurobiologically grounded advice. Most neurobiologically grounded advice. Most of us are looking down at our laptop of us are looking down at our laptop of us are looking down at our laptop while seated or we are lying down, which while seated or we are lying down, which while seated or we are lying down, which is going to make us more sleepy, or we is going to make us more sleepy, or we is going to make us more sleepy, or we are positioning our computers in front are positioning our computers in front are positioning our computers in front of us, but of us, but of us, but we really aren't in environment that's we really aren't in environment that's we really aren't in environment that's bright enough and so on and so forth. bright enough and so on and so forth. bright enough and so on and so forth. So, as you can tell, we're starting to So, as you can tell, we're starting to So, as you can tell, we're starting to layer in the various things that you can layer in the various things that you can layer in the various things that you can do. First, brightness in the room. do. First, brightness in the room. do. First, brightness in the room. Second, get that screen up and try and Second, get that screen up and try and Second, get that screen up and try and put yourself into a posture for work put yourself into a posture for work put yourself into a posture for work that lends itself or promotes alertness. If lends itself or promotes alertness. If lends itself or promotes alertness. If indeed you want to be alert for that indeed you want to be alert for that indeed you want to be alert for that work. If your goal is to take a nap, get work. If your goal is to take a nap, get work. If your goal is to take a nap, get your feet elevated about 10 to 15 your feet elevated about 10 to 15 your feet elevated about 10 to 15 degrees above your head, maybe put a degrees above your head, maybe put a degrees above your head, maybe put a pillow underneath it, lie down and take pillow underneath it, lie down and take pillow underneath it, lie down and take a nap, but that's not what we're talking a nap, but that's not what we're talking a nap, but that's not what we're talking about today. We're talking about work about today. We're talking about work about today. We're talking about work space optimization. And I suppose you space optimization. And I suppose you space optimization. And I suppose you could also exploit that all-nighter could also exploit that all-nighter could also exploit that all-nighter trick that I talked about earlier. I trick that I talked about earlier. I trick that I talked about earlier. I actually did this when I was an actually did this when I was an actually did this when I was an undergraduate. I was a little bit undergraduate. I was a little bit undergraduate. I was a little bit masochistic in this way. I would drink masochistic in this way. I would drink masochistic in this way. I would drink coffee and water at fairly high volume. coffee and water at fairly high volume. coffee and water at fairly high volume. I wasn't, you know, force drinking or I wasn't, you know, force drinking or I wasn't, you know, force drinking or anything like that, but I actually anything like that, but I actually anything like that, but I actually wouldn't allow myself to get up and use wouldn't allow myself to get up and use wouldn't allow myself to get up and use the bathroom except on a timer. So, I the bathroom except on a timer. So, I the bathroom except on a timer. So, I think the longest I ever went was like 3 think the longest I ever went was like 3 think the longest I ever went was like 3 and 1/2 hours. It was kind of and 1/2 hours. It was kind of and 1/2 hours. It was kind of excruciating. I actually don't think excruciating. I actually don't think excruciating. I actually don't think that's necessarily a healthy advice, but that's necessarily a healthy advice, but that's necessarily a healthy advice, but again, you can use slight, I mentioned, again, you can use slight, I mentioned, again, you can use slight, I mentioned, slight overconsumption of fluids in slight overconsumption of fluids in slight overconsumption of fluids in order to generate alertness. That was order to generate alertness. That was order to generate alertness. That was just me really trying to get as much just me really trying to get as much just me really trying to get as much work done as I could. I had a very work done as I could. I had a very work done as I could. I had a very demanding class schedule and it was just demanding class schedule and it was just demanding class schedule and it was just the only way that I could get work done. the only way that I could get work done. the only way that I could get work done. If I was getting up every few minutes to If I was getting up every few minutes to If I was getting up every few minutes to use the restroom, I found it hard to use the restroom, I found it hard to use the restroom, I found it hard to re-engage in that work and maintain re-engage in that work and maintain re-engage in that work and maintain focus, which is what I just want to focus, which is what I just want to focus, which is what I just want to briefly mention now. I talked about this briefly mention now. I talked about this briefly mention now. I talked about this in the episode on focus, but one thing in the episode on focus, but one thing in the episode on focus, but one thing that is completely unreasonable and that is completely unreasonable and that is completely unreasonable and that you should never ask yourself to do is you should never ask yourself to do is you should never ask yourself to do is to sit down or stand up and immediately to sit down or stand up and immediately to sit down or stand up and immediately focus on something unless you're focus on something unless you're focus on something unless you're stressed about what you're looking at or stressed about what you're looking at or stressed about what you're looking at or you're very, very excited by it. If you're very, very excited by it. If you're very, very excited by it. If you're very stressed about some sort of you're very stressed about some sort of you're very stressed about some sort of information or a deadline or you're information or a deadline or you're information or a deadline or you're very, very excited about something, very, very excited about something, very, very excited about something, you'll find that you can focus instantly you'll find that you can focus instantly you'll find that you can focus instantly just within a moment. And that's because just within a moment. And that's because just within a moment. And that's because of the deployment of neurochemicals like of the deployment of neurochemicals like of the deployment of neurochemicals like dopamine and norepinephrine that bring dopamine and norepinephrine that bring dopamine and norepinephrine that bring about our levels of alertness. However, about our levels of alertness. However, about our levels of alertness. However, most of us, including myself, will go to most of us, including myself, will go to most of us, including myself, will go to begin a work bout and we'll find that begin a work bout and we'll find that begin a work bout and we'll find that our mind doesn't quite engage at the our mind doesn't quite engage at the our mind doesn't quite engage at the level of depth and focus that we would level of depth and focus that we would level of depth and focus that we would like right off the bat. like right off the bat. like right off the bat. I've timed this and other studies have I've timed this and other studies have I've timed this and other studies have timed this in a more rigorous way. Mine timed this in a more rigorous way. Mine timed this in a more rigorous way. Mine is just what we call anecdata. But so is just what we call anecdata. But so is just what we call anecdata. But so I've timed it for myself, but there's I've timed it for myself, but there's I've timed it for myself, but there's studies that have looked at this and the studies that have looked at this and the studies that have looked at this and the data point to the fact that data point to the fact that data point to the fact that even at our most heightened levels of even at our most heightened levels of even at our most heightened levels of focus, most people can only maintain focus most people can only maintain focus most people can only maintain focus before switching tasks for about 3 before switching tasks for about 3 before switching tasks for about 3 minutes, which is depressingly short minutes, which is depressingly short minutes, which is depressingly short period of time. However, you can extend period of time. However, you can extend period of time. However, you can extend that period of time and I've talked that period of time and I've talked that period of time and I've talked about that in the episode on focus, but about that in the episode on focus, but about that in the episode on focus, but more importantly, when you sit down to more importantly, when you sit down to more importantly, when you sit down to start a work bout of any kind, any kind, start a work bout of any kind, any kind, start a work bout of any kind, any kind, expect that it would take about 6 expect that it would take about 6 expect that it would take about 6 minutes for you to engage these neural minutes for you to engage these neural minutes for you to engage these neural circuits. You wouldn't expect yourself circuits. You wouldn't expect yourself circuits. You wouldn't expect yourself to walk into the gym and do a PR lift or to walk into the gym and do a PR lift or to walk into the gym and do a PR lift or start running and do your best sprint or start running and do your best sprint or start running and do your best sprint or just head out the door without warming just head out the door without warming just head out the door without warming up at all. A you know, a little walk jog up at all. A you know, a little walk jog up at all. A you know, a little walk jog at first or you know, a few warm up at first or you know, a few warm up at first or you know, a few warm up sets. I mean, that's we expect that. We sets. I mean, that's we expect that. We sets. I mean, that's we expect that. We we are not surprised that we need that we are not surprised that we need that we are not surprised that we need that and yet we sort of expect that our brain and yet we sort of expect that our brain and yet we sort of expect that our brain should be able to lock on and do work in should be able to lock on and do work in should be able to lock on and do work in a very focused way immediately. And a very focused way immediately. And a very focused way immediately. And that's just a ridiculous assumption. that's just a ridiculous assumption. that's just a ridiculous assumption. It's an un fair assumption, I should It's an un fair assumption, I should It's an un fair assumption, I should say. So, assume that it will take about say. So, assume that it will take about say. So, assume that it will take about 6 minutes to engage in your work bout 6 minutes to engage in your work bout 6 minutes to engage in your work bout and that those neurochemical systems and that those neurochemical systems and that those neurochemical systems will take some time to rev up and will take some time to rev up and will take some time to rev up and engage. The other things that I'm engage. The other things that I'm engage. The other things that I'm describing about lighting and screen describing about lighting and screen describing about lighting and screen positioning and posture, those will also positioning and posture, those will also positioning and posture, those will also help maximize your focus and will limit help maximize your focus and will limit help maximize your focus and will limit that ramp up time into a focused state. that ramp up time into a focused state. that ramp up time into a focused state. And I think what you'll find is that as And I think what you'll find is that as And I think what you'll find is that as you maximize your workspace, the time, you maximize your workspace, the time, you maximize your workspace, the time, the latency as we say, to get into that the latency as we say, to get into that the latency as we say, to get into that focus will start to shorten. It will focus will start to shorten. It will focus will start to shorten. It will especially start to shorten if you use especially start to shorten if you use especially start to shorten if you use tools to limit distraction. We will talk tools to limit distraction. We will talk tools to limit distraction. We will talk about distraction, but things like about distraction, but things like about distraction, but things like Freedom, which is a an app a free app Freedom, which is a an app a free app Freedom, which is a an app a free app that allows you to lock yourself out of that allows you to lock yourself out of that allows you to lock yourself out of the internet, or turning off your phone, the internet, or turning off your phone, the internet, or turning off your phone, for instance, or but even if you're for instance, or but even if you're for instance, or but even if you're doing work on your phone or that doing work on your phone or that doing work on your phone or that involves your phone or the internet, as involves your phone or the internet, as involves your phone or the internet, as many of us, including myself, do, many of us, including myself, do, many of us, including myself, do, expect there to be a ramp-up time for expect there to be a ramp-up time for expect there to be a ramp-up time for you to focus. There's another aspect of you to focus. There's another aspect of you to focus. There's another aspect of our vision that's absolutely critical our vision that's absolutely critical our vision that's absolutely critical for optimizing our workspace. And that for optimizing our workspace. And that for optimizing our workspace. And that has to do with this really interesting has to do with this really interesting has to do with this really interesting feature of our visual pathways, in that feature of our visual pathways, in that feature of our visual pathways, in that it has two major channels. it has two major channels. it has two major channels. Those two major channels have names, Those two major channels have names, Those two major channels have names, although you don't have to remember the although you don't have to remember the although you don't have to remember the names. The first one is the so-called names. The first one is the so-called names. The first one is the so-called parvocellular channel, which is involved parvocellular channel, which is involved parvocellular channel, which is involved in looking at things at specific points in looking at things at specific points in looking at things at specific points in space and at high resolution or in space and at high resolution or in space and at high resolution or detail. And then there's the so-called detail. And then there's the so-called detail. And then there's the so-called magnocellular channel that's involved in magnocellular channel that's involved in magnocellular channel that's involved in looking at big swaths of visual space looking at big swaths of visual space looking at big swaths of visual space and at lower resolution. So, you can and at lower resolution. So, you can and at lower resolution. So, you can think of the parvocellular system as think of the parvocellular system as think of the parvocellular system as kind of a high pixel density. Think kind of a high pixel density. Think kind of a high pixel density. Think about your most modern smartphone, the about your most modern smartphone, the about your most modern smartphone, the recent smartphone with the best recent smartphone with the best recent smartphone with the best camera, and think about the camera, and think about the camera, and think about the magnocellular system as being lower magnocellular system as being lower magnocellular system as being lower resolution, kind of an older smartphone, resolution, kind of an older smartphone, resolution, kind of an older smartphone, lower pixels, etc. You might ask, why lower pixels, etc. You might ask, why lower pixels, etc. You might ask, why would you want a system that's, you would you want a system that's, you would you want a system that's, you know, low resolution? Well, the low know, low resolution? Well, the low know, low resolution? Well, the low resolution system is better at things resolution system is better at things resolution system is better at things like detecting motion and not so much at like detecting motion and not so much at like detecting motion and not so much at detail, and vice versa. Now, again, you detail, and vice versa. Now, again, you detail, and vice versa. Now, again, you don't have to remember the names. What don't have to remember the names. What don't have to remember the names. What you do have to remember, however, you do have to remember, however, you do have to remember, however, is that you're going to create the is that you're going to create the is that you're going to create the maximum amount of alertness in your maximum amount of alertness in your maximum amount of alertness in your system, the maximum amount of ability to system, the maximum amount of ability to system, the maximum amount of ability to focus, when your system is in that focus, when your system is in that focus, when your system is in that parvocellular mode, when you're bringing parvocellular mode, when you're bringing parvocellular mode, when you're bringing your eyes to a common point, what we your eyes to a common point, what we your eyes to a common point, what we call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e call a vergence eye movement, v e r g e n c e. I've said this before on the n c e. I've said this before on the n c e. I've said this before on the podcast, and people said, "Virgin eye podcast, and people said, "Virgin eye podcast, and people said, "Virgin eye movement?" No, vergence eye movement, as movement?" No, vergence eye movement, as movement?" No, vergence eye movement, as in convergence. Bringing your eyes to a in convergence. Bringing your eyes to a in convergence. Bringing your eyes to a single point in space single point in space single point in space will create a narrower aperture of a will create a narrower aperture of a will create a narrower aperture of a visual window, meaning your visual window, meaning your visual window, meaning your visual world actually shrinks, at least world actually shrinks, at least world actually shrinks, at least perceptually. Whereas, when you relax perceptually. Whereas, when you relax perceptually. Whereas, when you relax your eyes and dilate your gaze, you can your eyes and dilate your gaze, you can your eyes and dilate your gaze, you can do this now by whatever environment do this now by whatever environment do this now by whatever environment you're in trying to see without moving you're in trying to see without moving you're in trying to see without moving your head off to the side, above, below your head off to the side, above, below your head off to the side, above, below you, as broadly as possible. Maybe you you, as broadly as possible. Maybe you you, as broadly as possible. Maybe you can dilate your gaze so much you can see can dilate your gaze so much you can see can dilate your gaze so much you can see yourself, your body in that visual yourself, your body in that visual yourself, your body in that visual environment. You'll notice that your environment. You'll notice that your environment. You'll notice that your resolution of vision isn't nearly as resolution of vision isn't nearly as resolution of vision isn't nearly as high as when you do that vergence eye high as when you do that vergence eye high as when you do that vergence eye movement. Vergence eye movements are movement. Vergence eye movements are movement. Vergence eye movements are incredibly powerful for creating incredibly powerful for creating incredibly powerful for creating heightened states of alertness and heightened states of alertness and heightened states of alertness and focus. And indeed, they create focus. And indeed, they create focus. And indeed, they create heightened states of cognition, of heightened states of cognition, of heightened states of cognition, of thinking. And that's because your brain thinking. And that's because your brain thinking. And that's because your brain follows your vision in terms of focus. follows your vision in terms of focus. follows your vision in terms of focus. When we say, "I can't focus." what we When we say, "I can't focus." what we When we say, "I can't focus." what we often are experiencing is an ability an often are experiencing is an ability an often are experiencing is an ability an inability, excuse me, to not focus inability, excuse me, to not focus inability, excuse me, to not focus visually. Whereas, when we are in a very focused Whereas, when we are in a very focused Whereas, when we are in a very focused state, we are in a state often where we state, we are in a state often where we state, we are in a state often where we can focus visually. Now, we can also do can focus visually. Now, we can also do can focus visually. Now, we can also do this with our auditory system or to this with our auditory system or to this with our auditory system or to touch, etc. But right now, we're just touch, etc. But right now, we're just touch, etc. But right now, we're just talking about the visual system. Now, in talking about the visual system. Now, in talking about the visual system. Now, in terms of workspace optimization, what terms of workspace optimization, what terms of workspace optimization, what this means is this means is this means is we never really want to be looking at a we never really want to be looking at a we never really want to be looking at a square or rectangle or target area for square or rectangle or target area for square or rectangle or target area for our work that is too far beyond our work that is too far beyond our work that is too far beyond our ears. How far is too far? Really, you ears. How far is too far? Really, you ears. How far is too far? Really, you want to try and keep the blinders on, or want to try and keep the blinders on, or want to try and keep the blinders on, or I should say the invisible blinders, so I should say the invisible blinders, so I should say the invisible blinders, so that whatever you're looking at falls that whatever you're looking at falls that whatever you're looking at falls within the region of visual space in within the region of visual space in within the region of visual space in front of you that is present if you were front of you that is present if you were front of you that is present if you were to cup your hands and put them right to cup your hands and put them right to cup your hands and put them right next to your eyes. Now, this is a rough next to your eyes. Now, this is a rough next to your eyes. Now, this is a rough estimation, but I'm doing this now for estimation, but I'm doing this now for estimation, but I'm doing this now for those of you that are watching on those of you that are watching on those of you that are watching on YouTube. I'm doing this now. I'm trying YouTube. I'm doing this now. I'm trying YouTube. I'm doing this now. I'm trying to simulate like a horse with blinders to simulate like a horse with blinders to simulate like a horse with blinders on. For those of you that are listening, on. For those of you that are listening, on. For those of you that are listening, just imagine me looking silly with my just imagine me looking silly with my just imagine me looking silly with my hands cupped near my eyes. But, if we hands cupped near my eyes. But, if we hands cupped near my eyes. But, if we are to, for instance, look at a screen are to, for instance, look at a screen are to, for instance, look at a screen that's very, very big, that's very, very big, that's very, very big, and we're too close to it, or even if and we're too close to it, or even if and we're too close to it, or even if we're standing back from it, it's going we're standing back from it, it's going we're standing back from it, it's going to be hard for us to attend to be hard for us to attend to be hard for us to attend to everything within that screen space. So, everything within that screen space. So, everything within that screen space. So, this is actually support for the idea of this is actually support for the idea of this is actually support for the idea of using a phone or a tablet or a laptop. using a phone or a tablet or a laptop. using a phone or a tablet or a laptop. Some My laptop is about 15 in Some My laptop is about 15 in Some My laptop is about 15 in diameter, I think, is the one that I diameter, I think, is the one that I diameter, I think, is the one that I have. Some are 13, some are 17. Some of have. Some are 13, some are 17. Some of have. Some are 13, some are 17. Some of you like to use big monitors. Make sure you like to use big monitors. Make sure you like to use big monitors. Make sure that whatever it is that you're looking that whatever it is that you're looking that whatever it is that you're looking at, if you want to remain focused, it at, if you want to remain focused, it at, if you want to remain focused, it doesn't extend too far beyond where your doesn't extend too far beyond where your doesn't extend too far beyond where your eyes are. That's the sides of your head, eyes are. That's the sides of your head, eyes are. That's the sides of your head, that is. So, just think blinders on a that is. So, just think blinders on a that is. So, just think blinders on a horse. And actually, that's the reason horse. And actually, that's the reason horse. And actually, that's the reason they put blinders on a horse, so that they put blinders on a horse, so that they put blinders on a horse, so that they're not looking off into the they're not looking off into the they're not looking off into the periphery. Horses, unlike humans, don't periphery. Horses, unlike humans, don't periphery. Horses, unlike humans, don't have the same shaped pupil. They don't have the same shaped pupil. They don't have the same shaped pupil. They don't have a visual system that's organized in have a visual system that's organized in have a visual system that's organized in quite the same way. They mostly see in quite the same way. They mostly see in quite the same way. They mostly see in panorama, in magnocellular vision. And so, those in magnocellular vision. And so, those in magnocellular vision. And so, those blinders are designed to keep their blinders are designed to keep their blinders are designed to keep their visual focus straight ahead, so they visual focus straight ahead, so they visual focus straight ahead, so they physically restrict it. Now, physically restrict it. Now, physically restrict it. Now, some people will actually go to lengths some people will actually go to lengths some people will actually go to lengths to further restrict their visual focus. further restrict their visual focus. further restrict their visual focus. They will do things like putting on a They will do things like putting on a They will do things like putting on a hoodie or wearing a hat, for instance, hoodie or wearing a hat, for instance, hoodie or wearing a hat, for instance, to restrict their visual window. And to restrict their visual window. And to restrict their visual window. And indeed, that works quite well, but as indeed, that works quite well, but as indeed, that works quite well, but as we'll talk about in a moment, when you we'll talk about in a moment, when you we'll talk about in a moment, when you really restrict your visual window down really restrict your visual window down really restrict your visual window down to a very, very narrow to a very, very narrow to a very, very narrow portion of visual space, portion of visual space, portion of visual space, that actually changes the types of that actually changes the types of that actually changes the types of information that you're best at information that you're best at information that you're best at processing. And we'll talk about that in processing. And we'll talk about that in processing. And we'll talk about that in terms of something that's called the terms of something that's called the terms of something that's called the cathedral effect in a few moments. But cathedral effect in a few moments. But cathedral effect in a few moments. But for now, here's the principle. for now, here's the principle. for now, here's the principle. Make sure that whatever you're looking Make sure that whatever you're looking Make sure that whatever you're looking at is directly in front of you and at is directly in front of you and at is directly in front of you and doesn't extend too far out to the side. doesn't extend too far out to the side. doesn't extend too far out to the side. Once you get out to, say, 6 or 12, or Once you get out to, say, 6 or 12, or Once you get out to, say, 6 or 12, or certainly 18 in on either side of your certainly 18 in on either side of your certainly 18 in on either side of your eyes, you are dilating your gaze. By eyes, you are dilating your gaze. By eyes, you are dilating your gaze. By definition, you're dilating your gaze. definition, you're dilating your gaze. definition, you're dilating your gaze. It's completely subconscious, and it It's completely subconscious, and it It's completely subconscious, and it becomes very hard to maintain attention. becomes very hard to maintain attention. becomes very hard to maintain attention. Now, the caveat to this is that if Now, the caveat to this is that if Now, the caveat to this is that if you're going to look at a narrow space, you're going to look at a narrow space, you're going to look at a narrow space, a narrow window for any period of time, a narrow window for any period of time, a narrow window for any period of time, whether or not it's a book or a laptop whether or not it's a book or a laptop whether or not it's a book or a laptop or a tablet or a phone, or a tablet or a phone, or a tablet or a phone, those vergence eye movements not only those vergence eye movements not only those vergence eye movements not only create alertness, but they also require create alertness, but they also require create alertness, but they also require energy. And they also can fatigue the energy. And they also can fatigue the energy. And they also can fatigue the eyes, because there's a process called eyes, because there's a process called eyes, because there's a process called accommodation, whereby the shape of your accommodation, whereby the shape of your accommodation, whereby the shape of your eye literally has to change, so that the eye literally has to change, so that the eye literally has to change, so that the lens can move, so that you can focus at lens can move, so that you can focus at lens can move, so that you can focus at that location. Accommodation is an that location. Accommodation is an that location. Accommodation is an incredible process, but it is a incredible process, but it is a incredible process, but it is a demanding one, and that's the reason demanding one, and that's the reason demanding one, and that's the reason that your eyes get tired when you focus that your eyes get tired when you focus that your eyes get tired when you focus on something for too long. So, here's a on something for too long. So, here's a on something for too long. So, here's a principle extracted from the principle extracted from the principle extracted from the ophthalmology and neuroscience ophthalmology and neuroscience ophthalmology and neuroscience literature that you can adopt. For every literature that you can adopt. For every literature that you can adopt. For every 45 minutes in which you are focusing on 45 minutes in which you are focusing on 45 minutes in which you are focusing on something like a phone or a tablet or a something like a phone or a tablet or a something like a phone or a tablet or a book page or your computer, book page or your computer, book page or your computer, you want to get into magnocellular you want to get into magnocellular you want to get into magnocellular panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. panoramic vision for at least 5 minutes. And the way that I suggest to do this is And the way that I suggest to do this is And the way that I suggest to do this is actually to take a walk ideally outside. actually to take a walk ideally outside. actually to take a walk ideally outside. We're going to talk about ambulation, We're going to talk about ambulation, We're going to talk about ambulation, about movement, and about how that can about movement, and about how that can about movement, and about how that can maintain alertness throughout the day. maintain alertness throughout the day. maintain alertness throughout the day. So, for every 45 minutes or so, try and So, for every 45 minutes or so, try and So, for every 45 minutes or so, try and get 5 minutes of relaxing your eyes. get 5 minutes of relaxing your eyes. get 5 minutes of relaxing your eyes. This is something that's not often done This is something that's not often done This is something that's not often done especially in today's homeschooling and especially in today's homeschooling and especially in today's homeschooling and where people are where kids are going to where people are where kids are going to where people are where kids are going to school by Zoom and adults are working by school by Zoom and adults are working by school by Zoom and adults are working by Zoom, this is a serious problem. People Zoom, this is a serious problem. People Zoom, this is a serious problem. People are getting eye fatigue, they're getting are getting eye fatigue, they're getting are getting eye fatigue, they're getting headaches, indeed some people are headaches, indeed some people are headaches, indeed some people are getting migraines, they're having all getting migraines, they're having all getting migraines, they're having all sorts of issues, neck pain. sorts of issues, neck pain. sorts of issues, neck pain. Much of that, if not all of that in some Much of that, if not all of that in some Much of that, if not all of that in some cases, can be alleviated by this 45-to-5 rule. can be alleviated by this 45-to-5 rule. can be alleviated by this 45-to-5 rule. For every 45 minutes of focused work For every 45 minutes of focused work For every 45 minutes of focused work that you do, get 5 minutes where you get that you do, get 5 minutes where you get that you do, get 5 minutes where you get outside or if you have to be indoors outside or if you have to be indoors outside or if you have to be indoors where you can dilate your gaze. Now, where you can dilate your gaze. Now, where you can dilate your gaze. Now, some of you may be saying, "Well, that some of you may be saying, "Well, that some of you may be saying, "Well, that spits in the face of your 90-minute spits in the face of your 90-minute spits in the face of your 90-minute rule. You're trying to you've told us rule. You're trying to you've told us rule. You're trying to you've told us before that we should focus for 90 before that we should focus for 90 before that we should focus for 90 minutes." I would still want you to take minutes." I would still want you to take minutes." I would still want you to take breaks within those 90 minutes if you're breaks within those 90 minutes if you're breaks within those 90 minutes if you're looking at a narrow piece of visual looking at a narrow piece of visual looking at a narrow piece of visual world, meaning at a phone or a laptop or world, meaning at a phone or a laptop or world, meaning at a phone or a laptop or so forth. so forth. so forth. And again, the best way to do this would And again, the best way to do this would And again, the best way to do this would be to go outside, just relax your eyes, be to go outside, just relax your eyes, be to go outside, just relax your eyes, look off into the distance. Looking at a look off into the distance. Looking at a look off into the distance. Looking at a horizon will automatically trigger this horizon will automatically trigger this horizon will automatically trigger this panoramic gaze, which is very relaxing panoramic gaze, which is very relaxing panoramic gaze, which is very relaxing to the eyes and will allow you to go to the eyes and will allow you to go to the eyes and will allow you to go back into a focused work bout. back into a focused work bout. back into a focused work bout. The one thing you absolutely do not want The one thing you absolutely do not want The one thing you absolutely do not want to do is to go outside and check your to do is to go outside and check your to do is to go outside and check your phone. Because if you're outside phone. Because if you're outside phone. Because if you're outside checking your phone or you're taking a checking your phone or you're taking a checking your phone or you're taking a break and checking your phone, you're break and checking your phone, you're break and checking your phone, you're still in that vergence eye movement, still in that vergence eye movement, still in that vergence eye movement, okay? So, this is very, very important okay? So, this is very, very important okay? So, this is very, very important because vergence eye movements increase because vergence eye movements increase because vergence eye movements increase focus and attention and you can exploit focus and attention and you can exploit focus and attention and you can exploit that to increase focus and attention that to increase focus and attention that to increase focus and attention when you want to, but you absolutely when you want to, but you absolutely when you want to, but you absolutely need to relax the system. Again, for need to relax the system. Again, for need to relax the system. Again, for every 45 minutes in which you've been in every 45 minutes in which you've been in every 45 minutes in which you've been in that focused mode, you want to get at that focused mode, you want to get at that focused mode, you want to get at least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. If least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. If least 5 minutes of panoramic vision. If you can take a 15-minute walk, even you can take a 15-minute walk, even you can take a 15-minute walk, even better. Next, I'd like to talk about an better. Next, I'd like to talk about an better. Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect of workspace optimization that aspect of workspace optimization that aspect of workspace optimization that can actually bias whether or not our can actually bias whether or not our can actually bias whether or not our brain and nervous system are better brain and nervous system are better brain and nervous system are better suited for detailed, analytic work or suited for detailed, analytic work or suited for detailed, analytic work or more abstract work. more abstract work. more abstract work. In fact, there's a way that you can In fact, there's a way that you can In fact, there's a way that you can arrange your work environment, or arrange your work environment, or arrange your work environment, or I should say there's a way that you can I should say there's a way that you can I should say there's a way that you can place yourself into certain environments place yourself into certain environments place yourself into certain environments that will allow abstract thinking, that will allow abstract thinking, that will allow abstract thinking, creative thinking, and indeed expansive creative thinking, and indeed expansive creative thinking, and indeed expansive thinking to emerge. There are other thinking to emerge. There are other thinking to emerge. There are other environments that you can put yourself environments that you can put yourself environments that you can put yourself in that will make your brain shift in that will make your brain shift in that will make your brain shift towards more analytic work, toward more towards more analytic work, toward more towards more analytic work, toward more detailed and precise types of work. Now, detailed and precise types of work. Now, detailed and precise types of work. Now, I just briefly want to mention something I just briefly want to mention something I just briefly want to mention something that was covered again on the habits that was covered again on the habits that was covered again on the habits episode that I did a few weeks ago, but episode that I did a few weeks ago, but episode that I did a few weeks ago, but again, you don't need to see that again, you don't need to see that again, you don't need to see that episode in order to digest this episode in order to digest this episode in order to digest this information. It goes back to this issue of three It goes back to this issue of three It goes back to this issue of three phases within the circadian 24-hour phases within the circadian 24-hour phases within the circadian 24-hour cycle. Phase one, which as I mentioned cycle. Phase one, which as I mentioned cycle. Phase one, which as I mentioned is about 0 to 8 hours after waking. is about 0 to 8 hours after waking. is about 0 to 8 hours after waking. Phase two, 9 to 16 hours after waking. Phase two, 9 to 16 hours after waking. Phase two, 9 to 16 hours after waking. And phase three, 17 to 24 hours after And phase three, 17 to 24 hours after And phase three, 17 to 24 hours after waking. Phase one being ideal for waking. Phase one being ideal for waking. Phase one being ideal for analytic, precise, analytic, precise, analytic, precise, detailed types of work. Phase two, detailed types of work. Phase two, detailed types of work. Phase two, better suited for most people for better suited for most people for better suited for most people for creative, kind of abstract thinking, creative, kind of abstract thinking, creative, kind of abstract thinking, expansive thinking, brainstorming, et expansive thinking, brainstorming, et expansive thinking, brainstorming, et cetera. There are some exceptions to that, but There are some exceptions to that, but There are some exceptions to that, but most people follow that pattern because most people follow that pattern because most people follow that pattern because of the different neuromodulators and of the different neuromodulators and of the different neuromodulators and hormones and so forth that are released hormones and so forth that are released hormones and so forth that are released into the brain and body at those into the brain and body at those into the brain and body at those different phases. different phases. different phases. What I'm about to tell you What I'm about to tell you What I'm about to tell you is a way in which you can use your is a way in which you can use your is a way in which you can use your physical environment to further shift physical environment to further shift physical environment to further shift your brain and nervous system into a your brain and nervous system into a your brain and nervous system into a mode that's either prime for analytic or mode that's either prime for analytic or mode that's either prime for analytic or abstract and creative thinking. What I'm abstract and creative thinking. What I'm abstract and creative thinking. What I'm about to describe is called the about to describe is called the about to describe is called the cathedral effect. The cathedral effect cathedral effect. The cathedral effect cathedral effect. The cathedral effect has been discussed has been discussed has been discussed well, really for many, many decades, well, really for many, many decades, well, really for many, many decades, maybe even hundreds of years, but maybe even hundreds of years, but maybe even hundreds of years, but formally has been discussed since the formally has been discussed since the formally has been discussed since the early 2000s, in which it seemed that early 2000s, in which it seemed that early 2000s, in which it seemed that people who were in high-ceilinged people who were in high-ceilinged people who were in high-ceilinged environments, hence the phrase cathedral, hence the phrase cathedral, hence the phrase cathedral, would shift their thinking and their would shift their thinking and their would shift their thinking and their ideas to more abstract and creative ideas to more abstract and creative ideas to more abstract and creative lofty type thinking. So, literally lofty type thinking. So, literally lofty type thinking. So, literally higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher aspirations that this was aspirations that this was aspirations that this was observed in terms of the language that observed in terms of the language that observed in terms of the language that they used, but also the sorts of ideas they used, but also the sorts of ideas they used, but also the sorts of ideas that they would generate. that they would generate. that they would generate. And conversely, that people that were in And conversely, that people that were in And conversely, that people that were in lower-ceilinged environments lower-ceilinged environments lower-ceilinged environments would be more oriented toward using language be more oriented toward using language be more oriented toward using language that was more restricted, literally more that was more restricted, literally more that was more restricted, literally more detailed, analytic about things in their detailed, analytic about things in their detailed, analytic about things in their immediate space. immediate space. immediate space. Now, this seems kind of wild on the Now, this seems kind of wild on the Now, this seems kind of wild on the one hand, but actually, if we go back to one hand, but actually, if we go back to one hand, but actually, if we go back to our understanding of the neurobiology of our understanding of the neurobiology of our understanding of the neurobiology of the visual system and the way that our the visual system and the way that our the visual system and the way that our brains and bodies evolved in different brains and bodies evolved in different brains and bodies evolved in different environments, it actually makes a lot of environments, it actually makes a lot of environments, it actually makes a lot of sense. We don't have time to go into a sense. We don't have time to go into a sense. We don't have time to go into a long lecture about evolutionary long lecture about evolutionary long lecture about evolutionary neurobiology, but we have to remember neurobiology, but we have to remember neurobiology, but we have to remember that our nervous system has a number of that our nervous system has a number of that our nervous system has a number of features that are adapted to different features that are adapted to different features that are adapted to different environments. And indeed, we are able to environments. And indeed, we are able to environments. And indeed, we are able to go from big open prairies or mountain go from big open prairies or mountain go from big open prairies or mountain tops or large cathedrals or concert tops or large cathedrals or concert tops or large cathedrals or concert halls into small environments, and halls into small environments, and halls into small environments, and everything scales with it, right? When everything scales with it, right? When everything scales with it, right? When we're outdoors in a big expansive space, we're outdoors in a big expansive space, we're outdoors in a big expansive space, our vision tends to go long. We tend to our vision tends to go long. We tend to our vision tends to go long. We tend to be in panoramic magnocellular vision. be in panoramic magnocellular vision. be in panoramic magnocellular vision. Our hearing tends to extend long. Even Our hearing tends to extend long. Even Our hearing tends to extend long. Even if we're having a conversation with if we're having a conversation with if we're having a conversation with somebody, we tend to also be attending somebody, we tend to also be attending somebody, we tend to also be attending somewhat to the, you know, the screech somewhat to the, you know, the screech somewhat to the, you know, the screech of hawks off in the distance or to of hawks off in the distance or to of hawks off in the distance or to the rush of a river. Whereas, when we the rush of a river. Whereas, when we the rush of a river. Whereas, when we were in small spaces, everything, our were in small spaces, everything, our were in small spaces, everything, our vision, our hearing, and indeed even our vision, our hearing, and indeed even our vision, our hearing, and indeed even our physical movements become more physical movements become more physical movements become more restrained, even if we can still extend restrained, even if we can still extend restrained, even if we can still extend our hands out as far as we want. What do our hands out as far as we want. What do our hands out as far as we want. What do I mean by that? Let's say you're in an I mean by that? Let's say you're in an I mean by that? Let's say you're in an elevator, that's a small space compared to outside that's a small space compared to outside that's a small space compared to outside on a field. on a field. on a field. This has been measured over and over This has been measured over and over This has been measured over and over again. People's the size or the again. People's the size or the again. People's the size or the amplitude of people's spontaneous amplitude of people's spontaneous amplitude of people's spontaneous movements actually scales down in movements actually scales down in movements actually scales down in smaller environments, even if they smaller environments, even if they smaller environments, even if they aren't completely restricted from aren't completely restricted from aren't completely restricted from extending their limbs all the way. extending their limbs all the way. extending their limbs all the way. Whereas when we are outdoors, we feel a Whereas when we are outdoors, we feel a Whereas when we are outdoors, we feel a natural impulse to move further away a natural impulse to move further away a natural impulse to move further away from our from our from our body, our torso with our limbs. This our body, our torso with our limbs. This our body, our torso with our limbs. This is just feels like more appropriate is just feels like more appropriate is just feels like more appropriate behavior. And when I say appropriate, I behavior. And when I say appropriate, I behavior. And when I say appropriate, I don't mean in any kind of um social don't mean in any kind of um social don't mean in any kind of um social context necessarily. There's actually a reason necessarily. There's actually a reason necessarily. There's actually a reason for this. The visual system and the for this. The visual system and the for this. The visual system and the so-called vestibular motor system are so-called vestibular motor system are so-called vestibular motor system are intimately linked. And I can just tell intimately linked. And I can just tell intimately linked. And I can just tell you briefly uh one way in which you can you briefly uh one way in which you can you briefly uh one way in which you can test this and observe this and even use test this and observe this and even use test this and observe this and even use this. It's a little off topic from this. It's a little off topic from this. It's a little off topic from today's episode, but let's say you um today's episode, but let's say you um today's episode, but let's say you um have a certain amount of flexibility. have a certain amount of flexibility. have a certain amount of flexibility. You can extend your arms uh off like You can extend your arms uh off like You can extend your arms uh off like wings, as what I'm doing for those of wings, as what I'm doing for those of wings, as what I'm doing for those of you that are listening, not watching, you that are listening, not watching, you that are listening, not watching, off to your sides with arms straight. off to your sides with arms straight. off to your sides with arms straight. And you have you reach a maximum um And you have you reach a maximum um And you have you reach a maximum um positioning of flexibility. positioning of flexibility. positioning of flexibility. You can do a quick experiment You can do a quick experiment You can do a quick experiment where you where you where you sit still. You would bring your arms in sit still. You would bring your arms in sit still. You would bring your arms in for a moment. You could put them on your for a moment. You could put them on your for a moment. You could put them on your knees if you like or in front of you. knees if you like or in front of you. knees if you like or in front of you. And you can move your eyes very far off And you can move your eyes very far off And you can move your eyes very far off into the periphery of your visual field. into the periphery of your visual field. into the periphery of your visual field. So you're actually I'm going to do this So you're actually I'm going to do this So you're actually I'm going to do this now. It looks kind of silly, but moving now. It looks kind of silly, but moving now. It looks kind of silly, but moving my eyes without moving my head off into my eyes without moving my head off into my eyes without moving my head off into the periphery the periphery the periphery all the way to the right, then all the all the way to the right, then all the all the way to the right, then all the way to the left, all the way up, all the way to the left, all the way up, all the way to the left, all the way up, all the way down, but especially all the way to way down, but especially all the way to way down, but especially all the way to the left, almost looking over my the left, almost looking over my the left, almost looking over my shoulder without turning my head all the way to without turning my head all the way to without turning my head all the way to my right. And you will find that you my right. And you will find that you my right. And you will find that you actually can extend your arms further actually can extend your arms further actually can extend your arms further back subsequent to that. And that's not back subsequent to that. And that's not back subsequent to that. And that's not magic. It has to do with the ways in magic. It has to do with the ways in magic. It has to do with the ways in which your cerebellum, which it actually which your cerebellum, which it actually which your cerebellum, which it actually means mini brain, and your and your means mini brain, and your and your means mini brain, and your and your eyes, your visual system are connected. eyes, your visual system are connected. eyes, your visual system are connected. And the way in which your cerebellum And the way in which your cerebellum And the way in which your cerebellum controls some of the spindles and other controls some of the spindles and other controls some of the spindles and other aspects of the neuromuscular aspects of the neuromuscular aspects of the neuromuscular architecture of your nervous system, cuz architecture of your nervous system, cuz architecture of your nervous system, cuz your nerves control your muscles, and your nerves control your muscles, and your nerves control your muscles, and allow those muscles to move further out. allow those muscles to move further out. allow those muscles to move further out. So for those of you that lack So for those of you that lack So for those of you that lack flexibility, you can actually exploit flexibility, you can actually exploit flexibility, you can actually exploit your visual system for this. Now, that's your visual system for this. Now, that's your visual system for this. Now, that's again a bit of a tangent, but it's a fun again a bit of a tangent, but it's a fun again a bit of a tangent, but it's a fun one that relates back to this so-called one that relates back to this so-called one that relates back to this so-called cathedral effect. The cathedral effect cathedral effect. The cathedral effect cathedral effect. The cathedral effect is a way in which our thinking becomes is a way in which our thinking becomes is a way in which our thinking becomes more restricted and restrained in more restricted and restrained in more restricted and restrained in tighter, smaller, more confined visual tighter, smaller, more confined visual tighter, smaller, more confined visual environments. Or, if the ceiling is higher we are in if the ceiling is higher we are in if the ceiling is higher we are in expansive space with a lot of um expansive space with a lot of um expansive space with a lot of um distance above us or space above us and distance above us or space above us and distance above us or space above us and out to the sides, maybe even out on a out to the sides, maybe even out on a out to the sides, maybe even out on a field, our thinking goes into these more field, our thinking goes into these more field, our thinking goes into these more broad um broad um broad um abstract and kind of loftier uh future abstract and kind of loftier uh future abstract and kind of loftier uh future thinking in particular. thinking in particular. thinking in particular. This has actually been measured. There's This has actually been measured. There's This has actually been measured. There's a really nice paper. I will post a link a really nice paper. I will post a link a really nice paper. I will post a link to this. The authors are um Joan to this. The authors are um Joan to this. The authors are um Joan Meyers-Levy and Rui and then Meyers-Levy and Rui and then Meyers-Levy and Rui and then {parentheses} Juliet Zhu. I'm going to {parentheses} Juliet Zhu. I'm going to {parentheses} Juliet Zhu. I'm going to assume that they go by Juliet. The title assume that they go by Juliet. The title assume that they go by Juliet. The title of the paper is the influence of ceiling of the paper is the influence of ceiling of the paper is the influence of ceiling height, the effect of priming on the height, the effect of priming on the height, the effect of priming on the type of processing that people use. And type of processing that people use. And type of processing that people use. And I won't go into all the details of this I won't go into all the details of this I won't go into all the details of this paper, but what's really cool about this paper, but what's really cool about this paper, but what's really cool about this paper is they looked with very rigorous paper is they looked with very rigorous paper is they looked with very rigorous statistics and they have um a fair statistics and they have um a fair statistics and they have um a fair number of subjects and everything about number of subjects and everything about number of subjects and everything about this paper looks solid to me at the this paper looks solid to me at the this paper looks solid to me at the difference in cognitive processing difference in cognitive processing difference in cognitive processing and abstract thinking and detailed and abstract thinking and detailed and abstract thinking and detailed analytic work that people are able to analytic work that people are able to analytic work that people are able to perform in perform in perform in environments that have a 10-ft ceiling environments that have a 10-ft ceiling environments that have a 10-ft ceiling versus an 8-ft ceiling, which is not versus an 8-ft ceiling, which is not versus an 8-ft ceiling, which is not that much of a difference. There's just that much of a difference. There's just that much of a difference. There's just two 2-ft uh difference there. And what two 2-ft uh difference there. And what two 2-ft uh difference there. And what they found were significant effects they found were significant effects they found were significant effects whereby high ceilings activate concepts whereby high ceilings activate concepts whereby high ceilings activate concepts related to abstraction, whereas low related to abstraction, whereas low related to abstraction, whereas low ceilings prime confinement-related ceilings prime confinement-related ceilings prime confinement-related concepts but are promote the kind of concepts but are promote the kind of concepts but are promote the kind of detailed thinking that uh that lends detailed thinking that uh that lends detailed thinking that uh that lends itself well to sort of spreadsheet-type itself well to sort of spreadsheet-type itself well to sort of spreadsheet-type work or accounting-type work, whereas work or accounting-type work, whereas work or accounting-type work, whereas abstract creative work was supported by abstract creative work was supported by abstract creative work was supported by these higher ceilings. And the way they these higher ceilings. And the way they these higher ceilings. And the way they analyzed this was really interesting. analyzed this was really interesting. analyzed this was really interesting. Again, we don't have time to go into all Again, we don't have time to go into all Again, we don't have time to go into all the details, but they asked people to um the details, but they asked people to um the details, but they asked people to um sort of generate word sets related to sort of generate word sets related to sort of generate word sets related to particular topics like sports um and you particular topics like sports um and you particular topics like sports um and you know, so people would talk about soccer, know, so people would talk about soccer, know, so people would talk about soccer, football, baseball, golf, etc. and talk football, baseball, golf, etc. and talk football, baseball, golf, etc. and talk about some of the equipment and other about some of the equipment and other about some of the equipment and other things. And then they had things. And then they had things. And then they had a kind of a challenge, a cognitive a kind of a challenge, a cognitive a kind of a challenge, a cognitive challenge, whereby people had to link challenge, whereby people had to link challenge, whereby people had to link different concepts along different concepts along different concepts along different dimensions. So that you depart from the dimensions. So that you depart from the dimensions. So that you depart from the dimension of sport and you start dimension of sport and you start dimension of sport and you start thinking about, you know, sports that thinking about, you know, sports that thinking about, you know, sports that involve teams or sports that involve a involve teams or sports that involve a involve teams or sports that involve a ball, etc. And so in the same ball, etc. And so in the same ball, etc. And so in the same conditions, you can, except for the fact conditions, you can, except for the fact conditions, you can, except for the fact that the ceiling height is different, 8 that the ceiling height is different, 8 that the ceiling height is different, 8 ft or 10 ft, what one finds is that the ft or 10 ft, what one finds is that the ft or 10 ft, what one finds is that the kinds of language and the kinds of kinds of language and the kinds of kinds of language and the kinds of associations that people start to create associations that people start to create associations that people start to create are vastly different. And they they're are vastly different. And they they're are vastly different. And they they're actually two experiments in this study. actually two experiments in this study. actually two experiments in this study. You're welcome to go look at it. Um, so You're welcome to go look at it. Um, so You're welcome to go look at it. Um, so it wasn't just about sports. There were it wasn't just about sports. There were it wasn't just about sports. There were some other, um, things that were some other, um, things that were some other, um, things that were analyzed as well. And in the references analyzed as well. And in the references analyzed as well. And in the references of this paper, it also points to other of this paper, it also points to other of this paper, it also points to other examples now of the cathedral effect, examples now of the cathedral effect, examples now of the cathedral effect, which I find very interesting because as which I find very interesting because as which I find very interesting because as a vision scientist and someone who a vision scientist and someone who a vision scientist and someone who spends his life thinking about and spends his life thinking about and spends his life thinking about and indeed talking about the nervous system, indeed talking about the nervous system, indeed talking about the nervous system, we know that our cognition follows our we know that our cognition follows our we know that our cognition follows our vision. For low vision or blind people, vision. For low vision or blind people, vision. For low vision or blind people, that it will follow their, mostly their that it will follow their, mostly their that it will follow their, mostly their hearing and to some extent their touch. hearing and to some extent their touch. hearing and to some extent their touch. But for most people who are sighted, But for most people who are sighted, But for most people who are sighted, since most people are sighted, our since most people are sighted, our since most people are sighted, our cognition follows our cognition follows our cognition follows our visual environment. So what does this visual environment. So what does this visual environment. So what does this mean for workspace optimization? Well, mean for workspace optimization? Well, mean for workspace optimization? Well, most of us have a fixed ceiling, uh, most of us have a fixed ceiling, uh, most of us have a fixed ceiling, uh, level in our in our home, but you might level in our in our home, but you might level in our in our home, but you might have rooms in which the ceiling is have rooms in which the ceiling is have rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is lower. If that were the case, I lower. If that were the case, I lower. If that were the case, I recommend if you wanted to do creative recommend if you wanted to do creative recommend if you wanted to do creative work during phase two, the 9 to 16 hours work during phase two, the 9 to 16 hours work during phase two, the 9 to 16 hours of, uh, your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 of, uh, your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 of, uh, your circadian cycle, 9 to 16 hours after waking, that is, that you do hours after waking, that is, that you do hours after waking, that is, that you do that in the high ceiling room, or maybe that in the high ceiling room, or maybe that in the high ceiling room, or maybe even outdoors, out on a deck or on a even outdoors, out on a deck or on a even outdoors, out on a deck or on a patio, cuz the highest ceiling, of patio, cuz the highest ceiling, of patio, cuz the highest ceiling, of course, is the sky. Whereas if you're course, is the sky. Whereas if you're course, is the sky. Whereas if you're going to do detailed analytic work going to do detailed analytic work going to do detailed analytic work in I would suggest doing that during phase I would suggest doing that during phase I would suggest doing that during phase one of the day, but even if you're going one of the day, but even if you're going one of the day, but even if you're going to do it during phase two of the day, to do it during phase two of the day, to do it during phase two of the day, for whatever reason, scheduling or other for whatever reason, scheduling or other for whatever reason, scheduling or other sorts of constraints, that you do that sorts of constraints, that you do that sorts of constraints, that you do that in the lower ceiling environment. Now, in the lower ceiling environment. Now, in the lower ceiling environment. Now, if you are interested in controlling if you are interested in controlling if you are interested in controlling your the height of your visual world, your the height of your visual world, your the height of your visual world, but you don't have control over your, but you don't have control over your, but you don't have control over your, uh, the ceiling height of the uh, the ceiling height of the uh, the ceiling height of the environment that you're in, there's environment that you're in, there's environment that you're in, there's another way to do that. And I used to another way to do that. And I used to another way to do that. And I used to observe this in the cafes in and around observe this in the cafes in and around observe this in the cafes in and around Stanford in the Bay Area where you would Stanford in the Bay Area where you would Stanford in the Bay Area where you would see somebody who see somebody who see somebody who despite the weather would be in a despite the weather would be in a despite the weather would be in a hoodie, maybe with a baseball cap, or hoodie, maybe with a baseball cap, or hoodie, maybe with a baseball cap, or other form of hat, or some sort of other form of hat, or some sort of other form of hat, or some sort of blinder above their eyebrows, which is blinder above their eyebrows, which is blinder above their eyebrows, which is actually another way of just lowering actually another way of just lowering actually another way of just lowering the ceiling height very, very low and the ceiling height very, very low and the ceiling height very, very low and restricting your visual field. Not restricting your visual field. Not restricting your visual field. Not unlike blinders that we talked about unlike blinders that we talked about unlike blinders that we talked about before that one would put on a horse or before that one would put on a horse or before that one would put on a horse or one would put on them themselves by one would put on them themselves by one would put on them themselves by restricting their visual angle restricting their visual angle restricting their visual angle of focus to directly in front of them, of focus to directly in front of them, of focus to directly in front of them, but not too far out beyond the sides of but not too far out beyond the sides of but not too far out beyond the sides of their head. So, these cathedral effects their head. So, these cathedral effects their head. So, these cathedral effects I think can be leveraged toward doing I think can be leveraged toward doing I think can be leveraged toward doing particular types of work best. And particular types of work best. And particular types of work best. And again, the lower the ceiling or the again, the lower the ceiling or the again, the lower the ceiling or the lower your visual environment, the more lower your visual environment, the more lower your visual environment, the more that one tends to do or I should say that one tends to do or I should say that one tends to do or I should say performs detailed analytic work performs detailed analytic work performs detailed analytic work accurately. And the more that one's accurately. And the more that one's accurately. And the more that one's thinking is oriented towards detailed, thinking is oriented towards detailed, thinking is oriented towards detailed, sort of correct answer type work. sort of correct answer type work. sort of correct answer type work. Whereas when the ceiling is higher or Whereas when the ceiling is higher or Whereas when the ceiling is higher or there's no ceiling, the more that the there's no ceiling, the more that the there's no ceiling, the more that the brain and the rest of the processing brain and the rest of the processing brain and the rest of the processing that we call cognitive processing that we call cognitive processing that we call cognitive processing is related to abstract reasoning, is related to abstract reasoning, is related to abstract reasoning, brainstorming, and indeed can pull from brainstorming, and indeed can pull from brainstorming, and indeed can pull from broader swaths of memory resources. broader swaths of memory resources. broader swaths of memory resources. Because really what abstract reasoning Because really what abstract reasoning Because really what abstract reasoning is it's taking existing elements and is it's taking existing elements and is it's taking existing elements and maneuvering them or arranging them and maneuvering them or arranging them and maneuvering them or arranging them into novel ways. So, you could think into novel ways. So, you could think into novel ways. So, you could think about like notes on a piano, um playing about like notes on a piano, um playing about like notes on a piano, um playing a particular song, learning scales. a particular song, learning scales. a particular song, learning scales. That's very analytic. There's a there's That's very analytic. There's a there's That's very analytic. There's a there's a correct answer that you're trying to a correct answer that you're trying to a correct answer that you're trying to arrive at or generate. Whereas writing arrive at or generate. Whereas writing arrive at or generate. Whereas writing music or um writing poetry or generating music or um writing poetry or generating music or um writing poetry or generating um new material of any kind involves um new material of any kind involves um new material of any kind involves taking existing elements, right? You're taking existing elements, right? You're taking existing elements, right? You're not going to use words that you don't not going to use words that you don't not going to use words that you don't have committed to your memory or that have committed to your memory or that have committed to your memory or that you're not aware of, you're not aware of, you're not aware of, and arranging them in novel ways. So, I and arranging them in novel ways. So, I and arranging them in novel ways. So, I think the cathedral effect can be I think the cathedral effect can be I think the cathedral effect can be leveraged, and again, you don't need to leveraged, and again, you don't need to leveraged, and again, you don't need to move into a different home or build a move into a different home or build a move into a different home or build a slanted roof and work at one side of the slanted roof and work at one side of the slanted roof and work at one side of the room at one part of the day and the room at one part of the day and the room at one part of the day and the other side of the room at the other. other side of the room at the other. other side of the room at the other. Although, hey, if that's the way you um Although, hey, if that's the way you um Although, hey, if that's the way you um you want to swing it, that's great. Most you want to swing it, that's great. Most you want to swing it, that's great. Most of us don't have that flexibility, but of us don't have that flexibility, but of us don't have that flexibility, but it's very clear that the height of the it's very clear that the height of the it's very clear that the height of the ceiling of the visual environment that ceiling of the visual environment that ceiling of the visual environment that we're in has a profound effect on the we're in has a profound effect on the we're in has a profound effect on the types of cognitive processes that we are types of cognitive processes that we are types of cognitive processes that we are able to engage. Now, I'd like to shift able to engage. Now, I'd like to shift able to engage. Now, I'd like to shift our attention to the auditory our attention to the auditory our attention to the auditory environment or the noise in the room or environment or the noise in the room or environment or the noise in the room or the music in the room or the music or the music in the room or the music or the music in the room or the music or noise in the headphones because it turns noise in the headphones because it turns noise in the headphones because it turns out that there is a lot of quality out that there is a lot of quality out that there is a lot of quality scientific data out there scientific data out there scientific data out there that speaks to whether or not that speaks to whether or not that speaks to whether or not listening to particular sounds can listening to particular sounds can listening to particular sounds can enhance our cognition. And indeed, the enhance our cognition. And indeed, the enhance our cognition. And indeed, the answer is yes, but there are very answer is yes, but there are very answer is yes, but there are very particular types of things to listen to particular types of things to listen to particular types of things to listen to under very particular types of under very particular types of under very particular types of conditions that allow one to do that. conditions that allow one to do that. conditions that allow one to do that. First off, I want to say that people First off, I want to say that people First off, I want to say that people vary tremendously in the extent to which vary tremendously in the extent to which vary tremendously in the extent to which they can tolerate background noise for they can tolerate background noise for they can tolerate background noise for work. In fact, work. In fact, work. In fact, individuals will vary tremendously from individuals will vary tremendously from individuals will vary tremendously from one day to the next or even within the one day to the next or even within the one day to the next or even within the same day in the extent to which they can same day in the extent to which they can same day in the extent to which they can tolerate background noise. tolerate background noise. tolerate background noise. I've experienced this myself. There have I've experienced this myself. There have I've experienced this myself. There have been times in which I've been working at been times in which I've been working at been times in which I've been working at home and I felt like for whatever reason home and I felt like for whatever reason home and I felt like for whatever reason I just could not engage and focus. And I just could not engage and focus. And I just could not engage and focus. And what worked to generate more focus for what worked to generate more focus for what worked to generate more focus for me was to go to a cafe or to a library me was to go to a cafe or to a library me was to go to a cafe or to a library or some place where there's actually or some place where there's actually or some place where there's actually more commotion, more people moving more commotion, more people moving more commotion, more people moving about, maybe even more noise, maybe even about, maybe even more noise, maybe even about, maybe even more noise, maybe even music in the room. And we have to all be music in the room. And we have to all be music in the room. And we have to all be in touch with when we want more in touch with when we want more in touch with when we want more background noise or when we want less background noise or when we want less background noise or when we want less background noise. There is no hard and background noise. There is no hard and background noise. There is no hard and fast rule. If you look across the fast rule. If you look across the fast rule. If you look across the literature for studies that involve complete for studies that involve complete for studies that involve complete silence or white noise or binaural beats silence or white noise or binaural beats silence or white noise or binaural beats or music or classical music or rock and or music or classical music or rock and or music or classical music or rock and roll, you can find results to support roll, you can find results to support roll, you can find results to support any type of environment as being more any type of environment as being more any type of environment as being more beneficial. However, as we'll talk about in a However, as we'll talk about in a However, as we'll talk about in a moment, there are a few types of moment, there are a few types of moment, there are a few types of environments to really avoid and a few environments to really avoid and a few environments to really avoid and a few types of sounds that really can enhance types of sounds that really can enhance types of sounds that really can enhance the cognition and your ability to focus the cognition and your ability to focus the cognition and your ability to focus in your workspace environment across the in your workspace environment across the in your workspace environment across the board that really seem to work for all board that really seem to work for all board that really seem to work for all people. Let's talk about background people. Let's talk about background people. Let's talk about background noise to avoid. And here we're talking noise to avoid. And here we're talking noise to avoid. And here we're talking about background noise to avoid because about background noise to avoid because about background noise to avoid because it actually can cause it actually can cause it actually can cause um some pretty severe deficits in um some pretty severe deficits in um some pretty severe deficits in cognition. There's a paper, first author Jordan There's a paper, first author Jordan There's a paper, first author Jordan Love, cool name, Love, cool name, Love, cool name, um last author Alexander Francis. The um last author Alexander Francis. The um last author Alexander Francis. The title of the paper The title of the paper The title of the paper has to do with psychophysiological has to do with psychophysiological has to do with psychophysiological responses to potentially annoying responses to potentially annoying responses to potentially annoying heating, ventilation, and air heating, ventilation, and air heating, ventilation, and air conditioning noise during mentally conditioning noise during mentally conditioning noise during mentally demanding work, which is a mouthful, but demanding work, which is a mouthful, but demanding work, which is a mouthful, but basically what this paper identifies is a large what this paper identifies is a large what this paper identifies is a large data set in which workplace and data set in which workplace and data set in which workplace and environmental noise, mostly the humming environmental noise, mostly the humming environmental noise, mostly the humming of air conditioners that's very loud or of air conditioners that's very loud or of air conditioners that's very loud or the humming of heaters that's very loud the humming of heaters that's very loud the humming of heaters that's very loud and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let and ongoing, just incessant, doesn't let up, can really increase mental fatigue and can really increase mental fatigue and can really increase mental fatigue and can vastly decrease cognitive can vastly decrease cognitive can vastly decrease cognitive performance. And if you're interested in performance. And if you're interested in performance. And if you're interested in looking at the cognitive performance looking at the cognitive performance looking at the cognitive performance data, the authors are Banbury and Berry, data, the authors are Banbury and Berry, data, the authors are Banbury and Berry, 2005. That paper um is the one that 2005. That paper um is the one that 2005. That paper um is the one that supports the fact that cognitive supports the fact that cognitive supports the fact that cognitive performance is worse when there's just a performance is worse when there's just a performance is worse when there's just a hum of an air conditioner in the hum of an air conditioner in the hum of an air conditioner in the background or the hum of a heater and background or the hum of a heater and background or the hum of a heater and otherwise complete silence. otherwise complete silence. otherwise complete silence. There's also evidence, which I discussed There's also evidence, which I discussed There's also evidence, which I discussed on the episode about hearing, which is on the episode about hearing, which is on the episode about hearing, which is that in young children, white noise can that in young children, white noise can that in young children, white noise can cause some impairments in the cause some impairments in the cause some impairments in the development of the auditory system. Now, development of the auditory system. Now, development of the auditory system. Now, I don't want parents to freak out, and I don't want parents to freak out, and I don't want parents to freak out, and if you're exposed to white noise as a as if you're exposed to white noise as a as if you're exposed to white noise as a as a sleep aid as a child, a sleep aid as a child, a sleep aid as a child, which I know many of you were, which I know many of you were, which I know many of you were, uh don't freak out, but it turns out uh don't freak out, but it turns out uh don't freak out, but it turns out that white noise, especially if it's that white noise, especially if it's that white noise, especially if it's loud white noise, can cause some loud white noise, can cause some loud white noise, can cause some disruption in the auditory maps, the disruption in the auditory maps, the disruption in the auditory maps, the representation of different frequencies representation of different frequencies representation of different frequencies of sound in the brain that can lead to of sound in the brain that can lead to of sound in the brain that can lead to some deficits in auditory and even some deficits in auditory and even some deficits in auditory and even language processing. So, we really have language processing. So, we really have language processing. So, we really have to be careful about long-term exposure, to be careful about long-term exposure, to be careful about long-term exposure, extended exposure to white noise, or extended exposure to white noise, or extended exposure to white noise, or kind of air conditioning noise that's kind of air conditioning noise that's kind of air conditioning noise that's really at a high level. I wouldn't worry really at a high level. I wouldn't worry really at a high level. I wouldn't worry if it's in the background and it's if it's in the background and it's if it's in the background and it's shutting off and um turning on again as shutting off and um turning on again as shutting off and um turning on again as the thermostat kicks the thermostat kicks the thermostat kicks off and on, but really try to avoid work off and on, but really try to avoid work off and on, but really try to avoid work in loud, fan-filled, or ventilation uh in loud, fan-filled, or ventilation uh in loud, fan-filled, or ventilation uh generating, or heat generating generating, or heat generating generating, or heat generating environments because it really can cause environments because it really can cause environments because it really can cause damage to the auditory system long term. damage to the auditory system long term. damage to the auditory system long term. And as we described, it can impair cognitive as we described, it can impair cognitive as we described, it can impair cognitive performance and overall increase performance and overall increase performance and overall increase fatigue. I think we've all experienced fatigue. I think we've all experienced fatigue. I think we've all experienced that. When you're in a room and there's that. When you're in a room and there's that. When you're in a room and there's some ongoing background noise and all of some ongoing background noise and all of some ongoing background noise and all of a sudden it stops and you just feel this a sudden it stops and you just feel this a sudden it stops and you just feel this enormous relief. enormous relief. enormous relief. And the reason for this is that our And the reason for this is that our And the reason for this is that our auditory system auditory system auditory system has a parallel to our visual system. In has a parallel to our visual system. In has a parallel to our visual system. In our visual system, that light entering our visual system, that light entering our visual system, that light entering the eyes triggers the activation of the eyes triggers the activation of the eyes triggers the activation of those melanopsin cells which triggers those melanopsin cells which triggers those melanopsin cells which triggers activation of the hypothalamus, a activation of the hypothalamus, a activation of the hypothalamus, a particular area of the hypothalamus, particular area of the hypothalamus, particular area of the hypothalamus, which generates alertness, generates the which generates alertness, generates the which generates alertness, generates the release even of cortisol, a stress release even of cortisol, a stress release even of cortisol, a stress hormone. In the auditory system, when there's In the auditory system, when there's In the auditory system, when there's ongoing sound, your auditory system ongoing sound, your auditory system ongoing sound, your auditory system hears that even if you're not paying hears that even if you're not paying hears that even if you're not paying attention to it. If you're paying attention to it. If you're paying attention to it. If you're paying attention to something else, it still attention to something else, it still attention to something else, it still registers. Those little hair cells, as registers. Those little hair cells, as registers. Those little hair cells, as they're called, in your inner ear are they're called, in your inner ear are they're called, in your inner ear are fluttering, the eardrum is beating in fluttering, the eardrum is beating in fluttering, the eardrum is beating in concert to that to that sound frequency. concert to that to that sound frequency. concert to that to that sound frequency. And there's a brainstem mechanism that And there's a brainstem mechanism that And there's a brainstem mechanism that generates alertness and a kind of generates alertness and a kind of generates alertness and a kind of vigilance. So, when you have a sound vigilance. So, when you have a sound vigilance. So, when you have a sound that's ongoing in the background, it that's ongoing in the background, it that's ongoing in the background, it shuts off, shuts off, shuts off, all of a sudden you experience that all of a sudden you experience that all of a sudden you experience that peace, which is the turning off of those peace, which is the turning off of those peace, which is the turning off of those brainstem circuits that are associated brainstem circuits that are associated brainstem circuits that are associated with vigilance. with vigilance. with vigilance. The locus ceruleus, which we talked The locus ceruleus, which we talked The locus ceruleus, which we talked about earlier, which release epinephrine about earlier, which release epinephrine about earlier, which release epinephrine and norepinephrine and generate that and norepinephrine and generate that and norepinephrine and generate that heightened state of alertness in your heightened state of alertness in your heightened state of alertness in your brain and body, those neurons then can brain and body, those neurons then can brain and body, those neurons then can turn off and you experience that as turn off and you experience that as turn off and you experience that as relaxation. So, does that mean that we relaxation. So, does that mean that we relaxation. So, does that mean that we shouldn't listen to white noise or pink shouldn't listen to white noise or pink shouldn't listen to white noise or pink noise or brown noise while we're noise or brown noise while we're noise or brown noise while we're working? Certainly a lot of people do. working? Certainly a lot of people do. working? Certainly a lot of people do. In fact, if you want to know what white In fact, if you want to know what white In fact, if you want to know what white noise, pink noise, and brown noise are, noise, pink noise, and brown noise are, noise, pink noise, and brown noise are, they're just different they're just different they're just different constellations of auditory frequencies constellations of auditory frequencies constellations of auditory frequencies that are played together. Most of us that are played together. Most of us that are played together. Most of us think of white noise as the shh on a think of white noise as the shh on a think of white noise as the shh on a screen, you know, all the black and screen, you know, all the black and screen, you know, all the black and white pixels going all around like they white pixels going all around like they white pixels going all around like they call it visual snow. call it visual snow. call it visual snow. Um but pink noise has certain sound but pink noise has certain sound but pink noise has certain sound frequencies notched out, taken out. frequencies notched out, taken out. frequencies notched out, taken out. Brown noise has others. It has different Brown noise has others. It has different Brown noise has others. It has different frequencies that are that are included frequencies that are that are included frequencies that are that are included at higher amplitude, etc. You can look at higher amplitude, etc. You can look at higher amplitude, etc. You can look this stuff up on YouTube if you want. this stuff up on YouTube if you want. this stuff up on YouTube if you want. You just put brown noise. None of it You just put brown noise. None of it You just put brown noise. None of it sounds terrific. It doesn't sound like sounds terrific. It doesn't sound like sounds terrific. It doesn't sound like music. It's literally just noise, mixed music. It's literally just noise, mixed music. It's literally just noise, mixed frequencies in no particular frequencies in no particular frequencies in no particular arrangement. There is some evidence that arrangement. There is some evidence that arrangement. There is some evidence that playing white noise in the background or playing white noise in the background or playing white noise in the background or on headphones or pink noise or brown on headphones or pink noise or brown on headphones or pink noise or brown noise can facilitate cognition, but it's noise can facilitate cognition, but it's noise can facilitate cognition, but it's mainly through an increase in this mainly through an increase in this mainly through an increase in this overall alertness overall alertness overall alertness as a consequence of areas like locus as a consequence of areas like locus as a consequence of areas like locus ceruleus and other brain stem areas that ceruleus and other brain stem areas that ceruleus and other brain stem areas that are associated with autonomic arousal are associated with autonomic arousal are associated with autonomic arousal from that noise. So, it's a lot like the from that noise. So, it's a lot like the from that noise. So, it's a lot like the air conditioner effect. And I think done air conditioner effect. And I think done air conditioner effect. And I think done in a restricted way, meaning not for in a restricted way, meaning not for in a restricted way, meaning not for hours and hours, but maybe if your focus hours and hours, but maybe if your focus hours and hours, but maybe if your focus is waning and you're having a hard time is waning and you're having a hard time is waning and you're having a hard time engaging in work, you might put on some engaging in work, you might put on some engaging in work, you might put on some brown noise or white noise or pink noise brown noise or white noise or pink noise brown noise or white noise or pink noise and work that way for 45 minutes or so and work that way for 45 minutes or so and work that way for 45 minutes or so before you go to your panoramic vision before you go to your panoramic vision before you go to your panoramic vision walk and get some sunlight. That should walk and get some sunlight. That should walk and get some sunlight. That should be fine. There's really no reason to be fine. There's really no reason to be fine. There's really no reason to suspect, however, that those particular suspect, however, that those particular suspect, however, that those particular patterns of noise are going to optimize patterns of noise are going to optimize patterns of noise are going to optimize particular mental functions. So, what particular mental functions. So, what particular mental functions. So, what I'd like to turn to next are particular I'd like to turn to next are particular I'd like to turn to next are particular patterns of sounds that indeed have been patterns of sounds that indeed have been patterns of sounds that indeed have been shown in peer-reviewed studies to shown in peer-reviewed studies to shown in peer-reviewed studies to optimize certain types of mental optimize certain types of mental optimize certain types of mental processing because you can incorporate processing because you can incorporate processing because you can incorporate these into your optimized workspace these into your optimized workspace these into your optimized workspace environment through headphones or through speakers, through headphones or through speakers, through headphones or through speakers, whatever mechanism that you want, in whatever mechanism that you want, in whatever mechanism that you want, in order to get more out of your work order to get more out of your work order to get more out of your work efforts. If you were to search for apps efforts. If you were to search for apps efforts. If you were to search for apps or go online and try and find sounds or go online and try and find sounds or go online and try and find sounds that can improve thinking or change your that can improve thinking or change your that can improve thinking or change your emotions, you're generally going to find emotions, you're generally going to find emotions, you're generally going to find three types. One are called isochronic three types. One are called isochronic three types. One are called isochronic tones. These are tones usually of a tones. These are tones usually of a tones. These are tones usually of a common frequency. So, it might be a beep common frequency. So, it might be a beep common frequency. So, it might be a beep and then a pause and then beep of the and then a pause and then beep of the and then a pause and then beep of the same frequency and then beep. Forgive my same frequency and then beep. Forgive my same frequency and then beep. Forgive my terrible beeping. terrible beeping. terrible beeping. I don't know what good beeping would I don't know what good beeping would I don't know what good beeping would sound like, but sound like, but sound like, but contrast isochronic tones with monaural contrast isochronic tones with monaural contrast isochronic tones with monaural beats. Monaural beats would be beats. Monaural beats would be beats. Monaural beats would be repetitive, almost percussive-like beats repetitive, almost percussive-like beats repetitive, almost percussive-like beats delivered to just one ear. Doom doom delivered to just one ear. Doom doom delivered to just one ear. Doom doom do doom do doom do This kind of thing. Okay, you can do This kind of thing. Okay, you can do This kind of thing. Okay, you can find apps that can deliver monaural find apps that can deliver monaural find apps that can deliver monaural beats. You can find also apps that beats. You can find also apps that beats. You can find also apps that deliver so-called binaural beats. You deliver so-called binaural beats. You deliver so-called binaural beats. You can also find YouTube scripts that or can also find YouTube scripts that or can also find YouTube scripts that or channels that will deliver binaural channels that will deliver binaural channels that will deliver binaural beats. Binaural beats, as the name beats. Binaural beats, as the name beats. Binaural beats, as the name suggests, are beats delivered to the two suggests, are beats delivered to the two suggests, are beats delivered to the two ears. One pattern of kind of percussive beat One pattern of kind of percussive beat One pattern of kind of percussive beat to one ear and a different pattern that to one ear and a different pattern that to one ear and a different pattern that or at least a pattern that's out of or at least a pattern that's out of or at least a pattern that's out of phase, that's not synchronized, phase, that's not synchronized, phase, that's not synchronized, delivered to the other ear. So, on one delivered to the other ear. So, on one delivered to the other ear. So, on one ear you hear do And in ear you hear do And in ear you hear do And in the other ear, you've got do the other ear, you've got do the other ear, you've got do And what happens is because of the way And what happens is because of the way And what happens is because of the way that the auditory system converges in that the auditory system converges in that the auditory system converges in the brainstem and generates what are the brainstem and generates what are the brainstem and generates what are called interaural time differences. I'll called interaural time differences. I'll called interaural time differences. I'll explain what that means in a moment. explain what that means in a moment. explain what that means in a moment. Interaural time differences, Interaural time differences, Interaural time differences, the difference between the two patterns the difference between the two patterns the difference between the two patterns of beats that are heard by the each of beats that are heard by the each of beats that are heard by the each of the two different ears the two different ears the two different ears leads to a third pattern that the brain leads to a third pattern that the brain leads to a third pattern that the brain entrains to and kind of maps onto and entrains to and kind of maps onto and entrains to and kind of maps onto and generates particular types of brain generates particular types of brain generates particular types of brain waves. Okay? So, without going into a waves. Okay? So, without going into a waves. Okay? So, without going into a lot of detail, lot of detail, lot of detail, interaural time differences are the ways interaural time differences are the ways interaural time differences are the ways in which if you were to hear something in which if you were to hear something in which if you were to hear something off to your right, like I just snapped off to your right, like I just snapped off to your right, like I just snapped my finger just to the right of my right my finger just to the right of my right my finger just to the right of my right ear, that a signal arrives in my right ear, that a signal arrives in my right ear, that a signal arrives in my right ear before that sound signal, those ear before that sound signal, those ear before that sound signal, those sound waves arrive in my left ear. So, sound waves arrive in my left ear. So, sound waves arrive in my left ear. So, there's an interaural, between ears, there's an interaural, between ears, there's an interaural, between ears, time difference. And there's a brainstem time difference. And there's a brainstem time difference. And there's a brainstem area in which signals from one ear area in which signals from one ear area in which signals from one ear and signals from the other ear converge and signals from the other ear converge and signals from the other ear converge and there's literally a math done by and there's literally a math done by and there's literally a math done by your nervous system that says, "This your nervous system that says, "This your nervous system that says, "This signal arrived before the other signal." signal arrived before the other signal." signal arrived before the other signal." And the difference between those signals And the difference between those signals And the difference between those signals is the interaural time difference. So, is the interaural time difference. So, is the interaural time difference. So, if I were to snap my fingers on both if I were to snap my fingers on both if I were to snap my fingers on both sides, on my left and on my right side sides, on my left and on my right side sides, on my left and on my right side at the exact same time, and they arrive at the exact same time, and they arrive at the exact same time, and they arrive at the same time, the interaural time at the same time, the interaural time at the same time, the interaural time difference is zero. Whereas, if one goes difference is zero. Whereas, if one goes difference is zero. Whereas, if one goes first on the right and then the left, first on the right and then the left, first on the right and then the left, I'm terrible at snapping on the left, I'm terrible at snapping on the left, I'm terrible at snapping on the left, it's a weak snap, but it was there, then it's a weak snap, but it was there, then it's a weak snap, but it was there, then there's a delay and the interaural time there's a delay and the interaural time there's a delay and the interaural time difference has a particular value. Okay, difference has a particular value. Okay, difference has a particular value. Okay, you get it. It's almost ridiculously you get it. It's almost ridiculously you get it. It's almost ridiculously simple. Binaural beats Binaural beats Binaural beats have been generated in ways that create have been generated in ways that create have been generated in ways that create a particular pattern of interaural time a particular pattern of interaural time a particular pattern of interaural time differences that then cascades up to the differences that then cascades up to the differences that then cascades up to the rest of the brain and puts the forebrain rest of the brain and puts the forebrain rest of the brain and puts the forebrain and other areas of the brain that are and other areas of the brain that are and other areas of the brain that are involved in cognition and action into a involved in cognition and action into a involved in cognition and action into a particular rhythm. And some of the particular rhythm. And some of the particular rhythm. And some of the rhythms or waves of brain activity are rhythms or waves of brain activity are rhythms or waves of brain activity are ones that you may have heard of, things ones that you may have heard of, things ones that you may have heard of, things like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma waves. Now, I don't like to get to waves. Now, I don't like to get to waves. Now, I don't like to get to attached to particular brain waves as attached to particular brain waves as attached to particular brain waves as excellent for particular kinds of excellent for particular kinds of excellent for particular kinds of thinking. This is something that was thinking. This is something that was thinking. This is something that was really popular in the '90s and 2000s really popular in the '90s and 2000s really popular in the '90s and 2000s when ways of measuring brain activity when ways of measuring brain activity when ways of measuring brain activity non-invasively uh with electrodes on the outside uh with electrodes on the outside uh with electrodes on the outside uh enabled people to identify that indeed enabled people to identify that indeed enabled people to identify that indeed alpha brain waves are associated with alpha brain waves are associated with alpha brain waves are associated with alertness states and some are other alertness states and some are other alertness states and some are other brain waves that are kind of larger brain waves that are kind of larger brain waves that are kind of larger amplitude slow waves like um you know, amplitude slow waves like um you know, amplitude slow waves like um you know, delta waves are associated with kind of delta waves are associated with kind of delta waves are associated with kind of sleepiness or relaxation. But in sleepiness or relaxation. But in sleepiness or relaxation. But in general, the way that the brain works is general, the way that the brain works is general, the way that the brain works is that different brain waves are generated that different brain waves are generated that different brain waves are generated in different structures at different in different structures at different in different structures at different times and those combine to give us a times and those combine to give us a times and those combine to give us a sense of sense of sense of happiness or give us a sense of focus or happiness or give us a sense of focus or happiness or give us a sense of focus or give us a sense of creativity. give us a sense of creativity. give us a sense of creativity. Nonetheless, if you look across the board at the if you look across the board at the if you look across the board at the studies of binaural beats and you ask studies of binaural beats and you ask studies of binaural beats and you ask what sorts of binaural beats appear to what sorts of binaural beats appear to what sorts of binaural beats appear to be useful for people to enhance their be useful for people to enhance their be useful for people to enhance their brain function for particular kinds of brain function for particular kinds of brain function for particular kinds of task, we arrive at some very interesting task, we arrive at some very interesting task, we arrive at some very interesting answers. So, we'll review what those are now. The So, we'll review what those are now. The So, we'll review what those are now. The frequency of binaural beats that appears frequency of binaural beats that appears frequency of binaural beats that appears to bring about improved cognitive to bring about improved cognitive to bring about improved cognitive functioning at the level of memory, functioning at the level of memory, functioning at the level of memory, improved reaction times, improved reaction times, improved reaction times, and improved verbal recall and improved verbal recall and improved verbal recall seems to be 40 hertz. seems to be 40 hertz. seems to be 40 hertz. Now, is it exactly 40 hertz? We don't Now, is it exactly 40 hertz? We don't Now, is it exactly 40 hertz? We don't know. But know. But know. But if one wants to look up a great if one wants to look up a great if one wants to look up a great reference on this, they reference on this, they reference on this, they reference Colzato, c o l z a t o et al. 2017, Colzato, c o l z a t o et al. 2017, Colzato, c o l z a t o et al. 2017, describes and here I'm quoting, so describes and here I'm quoting, so describes and here I'm quoting, so this is a direct quote, "The present this is a direct quote, "The present this is a direct quote, "The present findings are in line with those of a findings are in line with those of a findings are in line with those of a recent study which also found faster recent study which also found faster recent study which also found faster reaction times in participants that reaction times in participants that reaction times in participants that listen to binaural beats of 40 Hz." And listen to binaural beats of 40 Hz." And listen to binaural beats of 40 Hz." And you can find many examples of this you can find many examples of this you can find many examples of this in the literature where binaural beats in the literature where binaural beats in the literature where binaural beats of about 40 Hz or exactly 40 Hz in some of about 40 Hz or exactly 40 Hz in some of about 40 Hz or exactly 40 Hz in some cases somehow brought the brain into a state somehow brought the brain into a state somehow brought the brain into a state that made it optimal for learning, for that made it optimal for learning, for that made it optimal for learning, for memory, and for certain types of recall, memory, and for certain types of recall, memory, and for certain types of recall, including verbal recall, math learning, including verbal recall, math learning, including verbal recall, math learning, et cetera. So, for those of you that are et cetera. So, for those of you that are et cetera. So, for those of you that are interested in binaural beats, uh there interested in binaural beats, uh there interested in binaural beats, uh there are a number of free apps out there. I'm are a number of free apps out there. I'm are a number of free apps out there. I'm not going to recommend any in not going to recommend any in not going to recommend any in particular, just have to search for one particular, just have to search for one particular, just have to search for one that um that you happen to like. that um that you happen to like. that um that you happen to like. One thing that you will find is that One thing that you will find is that One thing that you will find is that many of those apps superimpose binaural many of those apps superimpose binaural many of those apps superimpose binaural beats onto raindrops or ocean sounds or beats onto raindrops or ocean sounds or beats onto raindrops or ocean sounds or that rather they superimpose ocean that rather they superimpose ocean that rather they superimpose ocean sounds and raindrops onto the binaural sounds and raindrops onto the binaural sounds and raindrops onto the binaural beats. That does not appear to be as beats. That does not appear to be as beats. That does not appear to be as effective as pure binaural beats. effective as pure binaural beats. effective as pure binaural beats. There has been an exploration of lower There has been an exploration of lower There has been an exploration of lower frequency binaural beats. So, for frequency binaural beats. So, for frequency binaural beats. So, for instance, 7 Hz, which is theta binaural instance, 7 Hz, which is theta binaural instance, 7 Hz, which is theta binaural beats done for 30 minutes with an beats done for 30 minutes with an beats done for 30 minutes with an overlay of rain sound or rain sounds overlay of rain sound or rain sounds overlay of rain sound or rain sounds only, that's been analyzed and believe only, that's been analyzed and believe only, that's been analyzed and believe it or not, that showed immediate recall it or not, that showed immediate recall it or not, that showed immediate recall memory was significantly decreased. memory was significantly decreased. memory was significantly decreased. Okay, so that's a negative effect of Okay, so that's a negative effect of Okay, so that's a negative effect of binaural beats on memory. So, the idea binaural beats on memory. So, the idea binaural beats on memory. So, the idea that binaural beats are just great for that binaural beats are just great for that binaural beats are just great for us across the board, I think is wrong. us across the board, I think is wrong. us across the board, I think is wrong. It does appear that the higher frequency It does appear that the higher frequency It does appear that the higher frequency binaural beats binaural beats binaural beats as one moves up toward 40 Hz are going as one moves up toward 40 Hz are going as one moves up toward 40 Hz are going to be the most beneficial. to be the most beneficial. to be the most beneficial. There are instances in which, for There are instances in which, for There are instances in which, for instance, 15 Hz binaural beats increased instance, 15 Hz binaural beats increased instance, 15 Hz binaural beats increased response accuracy on a spatial verbal response accuracy on a spatial verbal response accuracy on a spatial verbal memory task. This is a complicated memory task. This is a complicated memory task. This is a complicated working memory task. Working memory is working memory task. Working memory is working memory task. Working memory is the kind of memory of remembering a the kind of memory of remembering a the kind of memory of remembering a phone number. So, if I say, um for phone number. So, if I say, um for phone number. So, if I say, um for instance, uh 4932931 instance, uh 4932931 instance, uh 4932931 and you have to remember that number. and you have to remember that number. and you have to remember that number. Keeping it online is what we call your Keeping it online is what we call your Keeping it online is what we call your working memory. It's likely that you working memory. It's likely that you working memory. It's likely that you would forget that two or three days would forget that two or three days would forget that two or three days later. You can get improvements in later. You can get improvements in later. You can get improvements in working memory with 15 hertz binaural working memory with 15 hertz binaural working memory with 15 hertz binaural beats. Whereas the other control conditions, 5 Whereas the other control conditions, 5 Whereas the other control conditions, 5 hertz and 10 hertz binaural beats, all hertz and 10 hertz binaural beats, all hertz and 10 hertz binaural beats, all decreased accuracy of working memory. decreased accuracy of working memory. decreased accuracy of working memory. However, when I look at the literature However, when I look at the literature However, when I look at the literature and I examined a number of different and I examined a number of different and I examined a number of different studies, what I always seem to come back to was what I always seem to come back to was what I always seem to come back to was that 40 hertz or so, plus or minus 5 that 40 hertz or so, plus or minus 5 that 40 hertz or so, plus or minus 5 hertz, seemed to be optimal for hertz, seemed to be optimal for hertz, seemed to be optimal for generating improvements in cognition, in generating improvements in cognition, in generating improvements in cognition, in math performance, and even in uh various math performance, and even in uh various math performance, and even in uh various types of uh memory recall, and even in types of uh memory recall, and even in types of uh memory recall, and even in musical performance. You might wonder, musical performance. You might wonder, musical performance. You might wonder, well, how can people do musical well, how can people do musical well, how can people do musical performance if they're listening to performance if they're listening to performance if they're listening to binaural beats? Here's another surprise. binaural beats? Here's another surprise. binaural beats? Here's another surprise. Many of the studies that I looked at Many of the studies that I looked at Many of the studies that I looked at didn't have people listening to binaural didn't have people listening to binaural didn't have people listening to binaural beats while they were doing the tasks, beats while they were doing the tasks, beats while they were doing the tasks, the memory task or the music learning, the memory task or the music learning, the memory task or the music learning, etc. They would do it beforehand for 30 etc. They would do it beforehand for 30 etc. They would do it beforehand for 30 minutes. There were instances in which minutes. There were instances in which minutes. There were instances in which people were listening to binaural beats people were listening to binaural beats people were listening to binaural beats during the task, but if you decide to during the task, but if you decide to during the task, but if you decide to employ binaural beats, I recommend this employ binaural beats, I recommend this employ binaural beats, I recommend this 40 hertz as a great place to start. I 40 hertz as a great place to start. I 40 hertz as a great place to start. I don't recommend doing it for all of your don't recommend doing it for all of your don't recommend doing it for all of your work bouts. I think there's a good your work bouts. I think there's a good your work bouts. I think there's a good reason to believe that you could reason to believe that you could reason to believe that you could attenuate to it. But if you are going to attenuate to it. But if you are going to attenuate to it. But if you are going to try it, you might try it both ways. You try it, you might try it both ways. You try it, you might try it both ways. You might try listening to binaural beats might try listening to binaural beats might try listening to binaural beats for about 30 minutes while doing for about 30 minutes while doing for about 30 minutes while doing something else, and then maybe eating something else, and then maybe eating something else, and then maybe eating lunch or something of that sort, or lunch or something of that sort, or lunch or something of that sort, or taking a walk, and then going into the taking a walk, and then going into the taking a walk, and then going into the work bout. Because remember, the moment work bout. Because remember, the moment work bout. Because remember, the moment that you start listening to these that you start listening to these that you start listening to these binaural beats, the brain doesn't binaural beats, the brain doesn't binaural beats, the brain doesn't immediately switch into a particular immediately switch into a particular immediately switch into a particular pattern of oscillation or brain waves. pattern of oscillation or brain waves. pattern of oscillation or brain waves. It takes some time. Neural circuits, It takes some time. Neural circuits, It takes some time. Neural circuits, again, take time to engage. The only again, take time to engage. The only again, take time to engage. The only neural circuits that are going to engage neural circuits that are going to engage neural circuits that are going to engage instantly are going to be the ones that instantly are going to be the ones that instantly are going to be the ones that are of a sort of reflexive sort. Like, are of a sort of reflexive sort. Like, are of a sort of reflexive sort. Like, you step on a sharp object and you have you step on a sharp object and you have you step on a sharp object and you have to retract your limb, or you suddenly to retract your limb, or you suddenly to retract your limb, or you suddenly are stressed by a distressing text are stressed by a distressing text are stressed by a distressing text message, or you're suddenly delighted message, or you're suddenly delighted message, or you're suddenly delighted about a delightful text message. But about a delightful text message. But about a delightful text message. But when it comes to shifting your whole when it comes to shifting your whole when it comes to shifting your whole brain state toward optimizing work, it brain state toward optimizing work, it brain state toward optimizing work, it takes a little bit of time. So again, 40 takes a little bit of time. So again, 40 takes a little bit of time. So again, 40 hertz binaural beats, many, many apps, hertz binaural beats, many, many apps, hertz binaural beats, many, many apps, many YouTube scripts out there, probably many YouTube scripts out there, probably many YouTube scripts out there, probably other resources for binaural beats, other resources for binaural beats, other resources for binaural beats, hopefully zero cost, so you can access hopefully zero cost, so you can access hopefully zero cost, so you can access those without any um those without any um those without any um need to shell out any money. If you need to shell out any money. If you need to shell out any money. If you find one that you particularly like, find one that you particularly like, find one that you particularly like, maybe put it in the comment section so maybe put it in the comment section so maybe put it in the comment section so other people can find it. YouTube would other people can find it. YouTube would other people can find it. YouTube would be the best place to do that. Feel free be the best place to do that. Feel free be the best place to do that. Feel free to put a link or just a description. to put a link or just a description. to put a link or just a description. That would be wonderful. That would be wonderful. That would be wonderful. And again, And again, And again, you don't need to listen to binaural you don't need to listen to binaural you don't need to listen to binaural beats at the exact same time that you're beats at the exact same time that you're beats at the exact same time that you're doing the work, although that could also doing the work, although that could also doing the work, although that could also enhance your productivity. Some of you enhance your productivity. Some of you enhance your productivity. Some of you out there might be craving a little bit out there might be craving a little bit out there might be craving a little bit more mechanism by which binaural beats more mechanism by which binaural beats more mechanism by which binaural beats can influence things like focus or can influence things like focus or can influence things like focus or reduced reaction time. This has actually reduced reaction time. This has actually reduced reaction time. This has actually been explored. been explored. been explored. This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern This 40 hertz binaural beats pattern seems to have an effect on what's called seems to have an effect on what's called seems to have an effect on what's called striatal dopamine. striatal dopamine. striatal dopamine. We have dopamine is a neuromodulator, of We have dopamine is a neuromodulator, of We have dopamine is a neuromodulator, of course, involved in many things in course, involved in many things in course, involved in many things in motivation. It's actually involved in motivation. It's actually involved in motivation. It's actually involved in adaptation to light in the retina, adaptation to light in the retina, adaptation to light in the retina, something that most people don't know. something that most people don't know. something that most people don't know. But it's involved in movement, which is But it's involved in movement, which is But it's involved in movement, which is why people with Parkinson's, who have a why people with Parkinson's, who have a why people with Parkinson's, who have a depletion of dopamine neurons, actually depletion of dopamine neurons, actually depletion of dopamine neurons, actually have movement deficits, and so on. But have movement deficits, and so on. But have movement deficits, and so on. But striatal dopamine is closely related to striatal dopamine is closely related to striatal dopamine is closely related to motivation and focus. And motivation and focus. And motivation and focus. And 40 hertz binaural beats appears to 40 hertz binaural beats appears to 40 hertz binaural beats appears to increase striatal dopamine release. And increase striatal dopamine release. And increase striatal dopamine release. And this is actually been measured this is actually been measured this is actually been measured indirectly by what we call spontaneous indirectly by what we call spontaneous indirectly by what we call spontaneous blink rate. blink rate. blink rate. Now, I've been accused in various Now, I've been accused in various Now, I've been accused in various Instagram posts, and even on this Instagram posts, and even on this Instagram posts, and even on this podcast, of being a podcast, of being a podcast, of being a non-blinker, let's call it, or a minimal non-blinker, let's call it, or a minimal non-blinker, let's call it, or a minimal blinker. And as an important aside, blinker. And as an important aside, blinker. And as an important aside, there is no evidence whatsoever that there is no evidence whatsoever that there is no evidence whatsoever that people that don't blink very much are people that don't blink very much are people that don't blink very much are sociopaths or lie. Also, you will hear sociopaths or lie. Also, you will hear sociopaths or lie. Also, you will hear that people who blink a lot are that people who blink a lot are that people who blink a lot are sociopaths and are lying. There is sociopaths and are lying. There is sociopaths and are lying. There is absolutely no evidence that blink absolutely no evidence that blink absolutely no evidence that blink frequency correlates with anything frequency correlates with anything frequency correlates with anything except alertness. except alertness. except alertness. Now, longer blinks are associated with Now, longer blinks are associated with Now, longer blinks are associated with less alertness. As we get tired, we tend less alertness. As we get tired, we tend less alertness. As we get tired, we tend to blink longer and longer until we take to blink longer and longer until we take to blink longer and longer until we take the long blink that is sleep. the long blink that is sleep. the long blink that is sleep. I guess the long blink would be death, I guess the long blink would be death, I guess the long blink would be death, but the longish blink would be sleep. but the longish blink would be sleep. but the longish blink would be sleep. But it turns out that the more firing of But it turns out that the more firing of But it turns out that the more firing of striatal dopamine neurons striatal dopamine neurons striatal dopamine neurons that's occurring, the more frequently we that's occurring, the more frequently we that's occurring, the more frequently we blink. And so, it is associated with a blink. And so, it is associated with a blink. And so, it is associated with a resetting of our visual window. That's resetting of our visual window. That's resetting of our visual window. That's what happens when we blink. And there's what happens when we blink. And there's what happens when we blink. And there's a whole relationship between blinking a whole relationship between blinking a whole relationship between blinking and time perception that we covered in and time perception that we covered in and time perception that we covered in the episode on time perception. But, the episode on time perception. But, the episode on time perception. But, here's the bottom line for sake of this here's the bottom line for sake of this here's the bottom line for sake of this discussion. 40 hertz binaural beats appears to 40 hertz binaural beats appears to 40 hertz binaural beats appears to increase spontaneous blink rates because increase spontaneous blink rates because increase spontaneous blink rates because it increases dopamine transmission in it increases dopamine transmission in it increases dopamine transmission in the brain stem and in the striatum in the brain stem and in the striatum in the brain stem and in the striatum in several locations, in fact. And so, the several locations, in fact. And so, the several locations, in fact. And so, the way in which these binaural beats set a way in which these binaural beats set a way in which these binaural beats set a rhythm in the brain recruits dopamine rhythm in the brain recruits dopamine rhythm in the brain recruits dopamine release. That dopamine release leads to release. That dopamine release leads to release. That dopamine release leads to heightened levels of motivation and heightened levels of motivation and heightened levels of motivation and focus. Why motivation and focus? Well, focus. Why motivation and focus? Well, focus. Why motivation and focus? Well, dopamine is actually the substrate by dopamine is actually the substrate by dopamine is actually the substrate by which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, the which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, the which epinephrine is made. Dopamine, the molecule, is actually converted into molecule, is actually converted into molecule, is actually converted into epinephrine, adrenaline. And they work epinephrine, adrenaline. And they work epinephrine, adrenaline. And they work together like close cousins, dopamine together like close cousins, dopamine together like close cousins, dopamine and epinephrine, in order to put us on a and epinephrine, in order to put us on a and epinephrine, in order to put us on a path of movement or if we are doing path of movement or if we are doing path of movement or if we are doing work, of mental movement toward a goal. work, of mental movement toward a goal. work, of mental movement toward a goal. So, that's a little bit of mechanistic So, that's a little bit of mechanistic So, that's a little bit of mechanistic meat to explain at least part of the meat to explain at least part of the meat to explain at least part of the reason why 40 hertz binaural beats can reason why 40 hertz binaural beats can reason why 40 hertz binaural beats can enhance our focus, reduce our reaction enhance our focus, reduce our reaction enhance our focus, reduce our reaction times, and improve indeed learning and times, and improve indeed learning and times, and improve indeed learning and memory. Next, I'd like to talk about the memory. Next, I'd like to talk about the memory. Next, I'd like to talk about the role of movement in optimizing our role of movement in optimizing our role of movement in optimizing our workspace and whether or not standing, sitting, and whether or not standing, sitting, and whether or not standing, sitting, lying down, treadmilling, or even, lying down, treadmilling, or even, lying down, treadmilling, or even, believe it or not, cycling can enhance believe it or not, cycling can enhance believe it or not, cycling can enhance our work output and performance. our work output and performance. our work output and performance. Before we do that, I want to touch on Before we do that, I want to touch on Before we do that, I want to touch on two aspects of optimizing workspace that two aspects of optimizing workspace that two aspects of optimizing workspace that will come up at some point in your work will come up at some point in your work will come up at some point in your work or school life. or school life. or school life. Alas, there isn't a lot of science Alas, there isn't a lot of science Alas, there isn't a lot of science around this, but I think they are worth around this, but I think they are worth around this, but I think they are worth mentioning. And I think I can offer a little bit of And I think I can offer a little bit of And I think I can offer a little bit of advice in terms of how to navigate these advice in terms of how to navigate these advice in terms of how to navigate these in a way that would be beneficial to in a way that would be beneficial to in a way that would be beneficial to you. The first one is interruptions. You The first one is interruptions. You The first one is interruptions. You know, if you go online and you ask know, if you go online and you ask know, if you go online and you ask about, uh, you know, how to avoid about, uh, you know, how to avoid about, uh, you know, how to avoid interruptions, people will say, "Okay, interruptions, people will say, "Okay, interruptions, people will say, "Okay, well, if you have kids at home or even well, if you have kids at home or even well, if you have kids at home or even if you don't or at work, you have a if you don't or at work, you have a if you don't or at work, you have a light like a recording like we're light like a recording like we're light like a recording like we're recording is on, we're busy now." recording is on, we're busy now." recording is on, we're busy now." Or have a sign on the door that says, Or have a sign on the door that says, Or have a sign on the door that says, "Bother only in a case of emergency." Or "Bother only in a case of emergency." Or "Bother only in a case of emergency." Or fine to knock or don't knock at all. fine to knock or don't knock at all. fine to knock or don't knock at all. I've used a different policy throughout I've used a different policy throughout I've used a different policy throughout the years. I the years. I the years. I am somebody who works pretty hard to am somebody who works pretty hard to am somebody who works pretty hard to control my time and focus, but of course control my time and focus, but of course control my time and focus, but of course as a laboratory director, I have people as a laboratory director, I have people as a laboratory director, I have people coming by and who want to talk about coming by and who want to talk about coming by and who want to talk about things. And of course, we have phones and we And of course, we have phones and we And of course, we have phones and we have computers and people's opportunity have computers and people's opportunity have computers and people's opportunity to reach us. Interruptions really are to reach us. Interruptions really are to reach us. Interruptions really are deadly to our ability to generate focus. deadly to our ability to generate focus. deadly to our ability to generate focus. And it's not just about the distraction And it's not just about the distraction And it's not just about the distraction that occurs of say a minute or two that occurs of say a minute or two that occurs of say a minute or two minutes or five minutes when we were minutes or five minutes when we were minutes or five minutes when we were interrupted. It's also about the interrupted. It's also about the interrupted. It's also about the additional time to get those brain additional time to get those brain additional time to get those brain circuits re-engaged to a mode of focus. circuits re-engaged to a mode of focus. circuits re-engaged to a mode of focus. So it's really kind of a double whammy. So it's really kind of a double whammy. So it's really kind of a double whammy. Now, none of us, including myself, want to be none of us, including myself, want to be none of us, including myself, want to be harsh or cruel or shut off from the harsh or cruel or shut off from the harsh or cruel or shut off from the world. And often times interruptions world. And often times interruptions world. And often times interruptions bring incredible insights and people are bring incredible insights and people are bring incredible insights and people are providing support and very useful things providing support and very useful things providing support and very useful things that are essential to my work day and that are essential to my work day and that are essential to my work day and presumably to your work day and school presumably to your work day and school presumably to your work day and school day as well. day as well. day as well. But there's a simple method that I But there's a simple method that I But there's a simple method that I learned from my graduate advisor that learned from my graduate advisor that learned from my graduate advisor that works very well. Again, no works very well. Again, no works very well. Again, no peer-review data support it. This is peer-review data support it. This is peer-review data support it. This is just my experience. just my experience. just my experience. But this is somebody who had immense But this is somebody who had immense But this is somebody who had immense powers of focus, had a very powers of focus, had a very powers of focus, had a very demanding life, a long commute, two demanding life, a long commute, two demanding life, a long commute, two children, extensive laboratory, etc. children, extensive laboratory, etc. children, extensive laboratory, etc. And what she would do was if I came by And what she would do was if I came by And what she would do was if I came by and asked a question or if anyone came and asked a question or if anyone came and asked a question or if anyone came by and asked a question, by and asked a question, by and asked a question, she would acknowledge their presence but she would acknowledge their presence but she would acknowledge their presence but would not shift her body toward them. So would not shift her body toward them. So would not shift her body toward them. So she purposely did not position her she purposely did not position her she purposely did not position her computer facing the door, which I think computer facing the door, which I think computer facing the door, which I think is a deadly is a deadly is a deadly or I should say deadly to focus or I should say deadly to focus or I should say deadly to focus way of positioning your work space. So way of positioning your work space. So way of positioning your work space. So her computer was facing the wall, the her computer was facing the wall, the her computer was facing the wall, the door was perpendicular to that. door was perpendicular to that. door was perpendicular to that. And I would come by and I say, "I have a And I would come by and I say, "I have a And I would come by and I say, "I have a question." And she would say, "Yes." So question." And she would say, "Yes." So question." And she would say, "Yes." So she would acknowledge my presence, but she would acknowledge my presence, but she would acknowledge my presence, but she wouldn't actually orient her body she wouldn't actually orient her body she wouldn't actually orient her body toward me, which told me that this toward me, which told me that this toward me, which told me that this conversation was not going to last very conversation was not going to last very conversation was not going to last very long. And no matter how long I stood long. And no matter how long I stood long. And no matter how long I stood there or what I asked, she would never there or what I asked, she would never there or what I asked, she would never orient toward me, which generally kept orient toward me, which generally kept orient toward me, which generally kept these conversations very short. We these conversations very short. We these conversations very short. We had other designated meetings where we had other designated meetings where we had other designated meetings where we would be face to face. The other would be face to face. The other would be face to face. The other approach, which approach, which approach, which I confess colleagues of mine have used I confess colleagues of mine have used I confess colleagues of mine have used before not necessarily at Stanford but not necessarily at Stanford but not necessarily at Stanford but elsewhere is to elsewhere is to elsewhere is to simply say no to everything that's simply say no to everything that's simply say no to everything that's somebody requests or comes by. So if somebody requests or comes by. So if somebody requests or comes by. So if someone would knock on the door they someone would knock on the door they someone would knock on the door they would just shout no through the door or would just shout no through the door or would just shout no through the door or if someone say can I bother you for a if someone say can I bother you for a if someone say can I bother you for a second they would say no or if someone second they would say no or if someone second they would say no or if someone say I have something I want to tell you say I have something I want to tell you say I have something I want to tell you they would just say no and they would they would just say no and they would they would just say no and they would just continue doing this until the just continue doing this until the just continue doing this until the person went away. That was actually very person went away. That was actually very person went away. That was actually very effective. These were some of the most effective. These were some of the most effective. These were some of the most productive people I know not always the productive people I know not always the productive people I know not always the kindest people but some of them were kindest people but some of them were kindest people but some of them were very kind. The other approach that I've very kind. The other approach that I've very kind. The other approach that I've seen and actually this is an approach seen and actually this is an approach seen and actually this is an approach that was used by someone who has been a that was used by someone who has been a that was used by someone who has been a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast guest on the Huberman Lab podcast guest on the Huberman Lab podcast someone who's immensely productive was someone who's immensely productive was someone who's immensely productive was that he so I'm constraining the who this that he so I'm constraining the who this that he so I'm constraining the who this might be by saying he might be by saying he might be by saying he actually despite having the option to he actually despite having the option to he actually despite having the option to have a very large office would place have a very large office would place have a very large office would place himself in a workspace that was literally a coat in a workspace that was literally a coat in a workspace that was literally a coat closet cleared out with a desk small closet cleared out with a desk small closet cleared out with a desk small lamp completely dark. So this violates lamp completely dark. So this violates lamp completely dark. So this violates everything that I've talked about before everything that I've talked about before everything that I've talked about before or prior to this everything about high or prior to this everything about high or prior to this everything about high ceilings bright light etc. and would ceilings bright light etc. and would ceilings bright light etc. and would work still works underneath a desk lamp work still works underneath a desk lamp work still works underneath a desk lamp in a completely dark closet minimal in a completely dark closet minimal in a completely dark closet minimal ventilation. This is my definition of ventilation. This is my definition of ventilation. This is my definition of hell and yet is one of the most hell and yet is one of the most hell and yet is one of the most productive people on the planet also productive people on the planet also productive people on the planet also very hard to find. I actually know very hard to find. I actually know very hard to find. I actually know where his closet is and turns out he has where his closet is and turns out he has where his closet is and turns out he has several of them that he migrates from in several of them that he migrates from in several of them that he migrates from in order to avoid distractions. So I order to avoid distractions. So I order to avoid distractions. So I mentioned these as kind of extremes. I mentioned these as kind of extremes. I mentioned these as kind of extremes. I think that most of us exist on the other think that most of us exist on the other think that most of us exist on the other extreme and that's why I mentioned it extreme and that's why I mentioned it extreme and that's why I mentioned it which is that most of us which is that most of us which is that most of us like some social engagement and kind of like some social engagement and kind of like some social engagement and kind of welcome or at least set our work welcome or at least set our work welcome or at least set our work environment in a way that welcomes environment in a way that welcomes environment in a way that welcomes interruption and we have to be very interruption and we have to be very interruption and we have to be very careful about this. Now in the digital careful about this. Now in the digital careful about this. Now in the digital realm I already mentioned a few of the realm I already mentioned a few of the realm I already mentioned a few of the things that we can do things that we can do things that we can do as practical tools to limit as practical tools to limit as practical tools to limit interruptions. One is to use the program interruptions. One is to use the program interruptions. One is to use the program freedom. The other would be to simply freedom. The other would be to simply freedom. The other would be to simply turn off the Wi-Fi. If you do need to be turn off the Wi-Fi. If you do need to be turn off the Wi-Fi. If you do need to be online and navigating you're doing online and navigating you're doing online and navigating you're doing research of any kind that's not going to research of any kind that's not going to research of any kind that's not going to be possible. Turning off one's phone, be possible. Turning off one's phone, be possible. Turning off one's phone, I've at times put my phone on I've at times put my phone on I've at times put my phone on airplane mode. If that didn't work, I've airplane mode. If that didn't work, I've airplane mode. If that didn't work, I've locked it in a safe. I've done that. locked it in a safe. I've done that. locked it in a safe. I've done that. I've left in the car outside. It all I've left in the car outside. It all I've left in the car outside. It all depends on one's levels of depends on one's levels of depends on one's levels of self-discipline, which as you probably self-discipline, which as you probably self-discipline, which as you probably know from your own experience, tends to know from your own experience, tends to know from your own experience, tends to kind of wax and wane. Sometimes we are kind of wax and wane. Sometimes we are kind of wax and wane. Sometimes we are better at avoiding these distractions better at avoiding these distractions better at avoiding these distractions than others. So, if you find yourself in than others. So, if you find yourself in than others. So, if you find yourself in a place where it's very hard to reduce a place where it's very hard to reduce a place where it's very hard to reduce those distractions, you may need to go those distractions, you may need to go those distractions, you may need to go to um more elaborate lengths. I will say to um more elaborate lengths. I will say to um more elaborate lengths. I will say that uh a graduate student in my lab who that uh a graduate student in my lab who that uh a graduate student in my lab who was immensely productive and focused had was immensely productive and focused had was immensely productive and focused had the habit of coming in each day. the habit of coming in each day. the habit of coming in each day. She would She would She would take her phone. I don't know if she take her phone. I don't know if she take her phone. I don't know if she turned it on off or not, and she would turned it on off or not, and she would turned it on off or not, and she would just place it in the door excuse me, in just place it in the door excuse me, in just place it in the door excuse me, in a drawer, and would then go start doing a drawer, and would then go start doing a drawer, and would then go start doing experiments. We do experiments all day experiments. We do experiments all day experiments. We do experiments all day at 10 courses, engage in discussions at 10 courses, engage in discussions at 10 courses, engage in discussions avidly with the rest of us, and then avidly with the rest of us, and then avidly with the rest of us, and then would take her phone out at the end of would take her phone out at the end of would take her phone out at the end of the day and leave. And I don't think the day and leave. And I don't think the day and leave. And I don't think that behavior was not correlated with that behavior was not correlated with that behavior was not correlated with her immense productivity. I think the her immense productivity. I think the her immense productivity. I think the ability to ability to ability to untether ourselves from the phone is untether ourselves from the phone is untether ourselves from the phone is going to be the way in which many of us going to be the way in which many of us going to be the way in which many of us are either going to succeed or fail in are either going to succeed or fail in are either going to succeed or fail in our various pursuits. I'm somebody who our various pursuits. I'm somebody who our various pursuits. I'm somebody who engages on with the phone on a regular engages on with the phone on a regular engages on with the phone on a regular basis throughout the day for various basis throughout the day for various basis throughout the day for various reasons, but I do try and have large reasons, but I do try and have large reasons, but I do try and have large swaths of the day in which it's either swaths of the day in which it's either swaths of the day in which it's either on airplane mode or it's completely on airplane mode or it's completely on airplane mode or it's completely physically separated from me. And when I physically separated from me. And when I physically separated from me. And when I mean large swaths, I might do every mean large swaths, I might do every mean large swaths, I might do every other hour with the phone on airplane other hour with the phone on airplane other hour with the phone on airplane mode or even a two or three-hour bout mode or even a two or three-hour bout mode or even a two or three-hour bout where I just am simply not engaged with where I just am simply not engaged with where I just am simply not engaged with the phone at all. So, is it better to the phone at all. So, is it better to the phone at all. So, is it better to sit or is it better to stand when doing sit or is it better to stand when doing sit or is it better to stand when doing work, at least as it relates to focus work, at least as it relates to focus work, at least as it relates to focus and productivity? And the answer is and productivity? And the answer is and productivity? And the answer is both. There've been a number of systematic There've been a number of systematic There've been a number of systematic studies exploring what are called studies exploring what are called studies exploring what are called sit-stand desks. So, these are desks sit-stand desks. So, these are desks sit-stand desks. So, these are desks that can be set to a height that makes that can be set to a height that makes that can be set to a height that makes standing the best practice, and then they can be the best practice, and then they can be the best practice, and then they can be lowered to a height that makes sitting lowered to a height that makes sitting lowered to a height that makes sitting the best practice or the easiest the best practice or the easiest the best practice or the easiest practice, I should say. practice, I should say. practice, I should say. And it turns out that And it turns out that And it turns out that just sitting is terrible for us, okay? just sitting is terrible for us, okay? just sitting is terrible for us, okay? And there's an enormous number of And there's an enormous number of And there's an enormous number of studies out there that have pointed to studies out there that have pointed to studies out there that have pointed to the fact that people who sit for five or the fact that people who sit for five or the fact that people who sit for five or six or seven hours a day doing work have six or seven hours a day doing work have six or seven hours a day doing work have all sorts of issues related to sleep, all sorts of issues related to sleep, all sorts of issues related to sleep, neck pain, cognition suffers, there are neck pain, cognition suffers, there are neck pain, cognition suffers, there are a number of cardiovascular effects, even a number of cardiovascular effects, even a number of cardiovascular effects, even digestion. There may even actually be digestion. There may even actually be digestion. There may even actually be some almost pressure effects on the some almost pressure effects on the some almost pressure effects on the pelvic floor and things of that sort pelvic floor and things of that sort pelvic floor and things of that sort depending on the chairs that one uses. depending on the chairs that one uses. depending on the chairs that one uses. But that people who stand are in a But that people who stand are in a But that people who stand are in a slightly better situation where many of slightly better situation where many of slightly better situation where many of those health metrics improve, but that those health metrics improve, but that those health metrics improve, but that people that do a combination of sitting people that do a combination of sitting people that do a combination of sitting and standing at the same desk throughout and standing at the same desk throughout and standing at the same desk throughout the day or move from one desk to another the day or move from one desk to another the day or move from one desk to another if they don't have a combination if they don't have a combination if they don't have a combination sit-stand desk, that going to be best. sit-stand desk, that going to be best. sit-stand desk, that going to be best. The good news is it's very easy to The good news is it's very easy to The good news is it's very easy to convert a sit desk into a stand desk. convert a sit desk into a stand desk. convert a sit desk into a stand desk. You can just stack some boxes. I've done You can just stack some boxes. I've done You can just stack some boxes. I've done this at times or stack books. There are this at times or stack books. There are this at times or stack books. There are also some pedestals and things that you also some pedestals and things that you also some pedestals and things that you can purchase if that's um your can purchase if that's um your can purchase if that's um your preference in order to set your computer preference in order to set your computer preference in order to set your computer at a particular height. And of course, at a particular height. And of course, at a particular height. And of course, there are desks that have motors and there are desks that have motors and there are desks that have motors and there ones that have cranks and there ones that have cranks and there ones that have cranks and there all sorts of variations both um in terms all sorts of variations both um in terms all sorts of variations both um in terms of the types and whether or not they of the types and whether or not they of the types and whether or not they have motors as well as the cost to these have motors as well as the cost to these have motors as well as the cost to these things. So, they can go from very low things. So, they can go from very low things. So, they can go from very low cost like placing boxes or books as a to cost like placing boxes or books as a to cost like placing boxes or books as a to create a standing desk um to very high create a standing desk um to very high create a standing desk um to very high cost in some cases. cost in some cases. cost in some cases. Now, what's interesting if you look at the what's interesting if you look at the what's interesting if you look at the scientific literature is that people who scientific literature is that people who scientific literature is that people who decreased their sitting time by about decreased their sitting time by about decreased their sitting time by about half each day. So, they took Let's say half each day. So, they took Let's say half each day. So, they took Let's say they were working for um 7 hours a day, they were working for um 7 hours a day, they were working for um 7 hours a day, 3 and 1/2 hours of the 3 and 1/2 hours of the 3 and 1/2 hours of the that day they decided to stand and it's that day they decided to stand and it's that day they decided to stand and it's not even clear that it matters that they not even clear that it matters that they not even clear that it matters that they do all those 3 hours in one bout or they do all those 3 hours in one bout or they do all those 3 hours in one bout or they divide that up into shorter bouts of a divide that up into shorter bouts of a divide that up into shorter bouts of a half an hour and then sit for half an half an hour and then sit for half an half an hour and then sit for half an hour etc. alternating back and forth hour etc. alternating back and forth hour etc. alternating back and forth showed incredibly significant effects showed incredibly significant effects showed incredibly significant effects on reduced neck and shoulder pain, on reduced neck and shoulder pain, on reduced neck and shoulder pain, increase in subjective health, vitality increase in subjective health, vitality increase in subjective health, vitality in work-related environments, and in work-related environments, and in work-related environments, and perhaps most importantly for sake of perhaps most importantly for sake of perhaps most importantly for sake of today's discussion today's discussion today's discussion improvement in cognitive conditioning improvement in cognitive conditioning improvement in cognitive conditioning and the ability to embrace new tasks and the ability to embrace new tasks and the ability to embrace new tasks and cognitive performance. cognitive performance. cognitive performance. There are several studies that if one There are several studies that if one There are several studies that if one wanted to explore they could explore wanted to explore they could explore wanted to explore they could explore this in more detail. I'll put a link to this in more detail. I'll put a link to this in more detail. I'll put a link to this as well. this as well. this as well. The article that I'm referring to is The article that I'm referring to is The article that I'm referring to is called effect of workplace sit-stand called effect of workplace sit-stand called effect of workplace sit-stand desk intervention on health and desk intervention on health and desk intervention on health and productivity. And I like this paper productivity. And I like this paper productivity. And I like this paper because many of the papers out there because many of the papers out there because many of the papers out there focus on the effects of sit-stand desks focus on the effects of sit-stand desks focus on the effects of sit-stand desks on health and trying to get people to on health and trying to get people to on health and trying to get people to burn more calories, improve their burn more calories, improve their burn more calories, improve their posture, relieve neck pain, slumped posture, relieve neck pain, slumped posture, relieve neck pain, slumped over, etc. But not on productivity. And over, etc. But not on productivity. And over, etc. But not on productivity. And this particular paper focuses also on this particular paper focuses also on this particular paper focuses also on the metrics of productivity. It has its the metrics of productivity. It has its the metrics of productivity. It has its own study and also references a number own study and also references a number own study and also references a number of important studies. What does this of important studies. What does this of important studies. What does this mean for you and me? Well, I've long mean for you and me? Well, I've long mean for you and me? Well, I've long used a standing desk or some variation used a standing desk or some variation used a standing desk or some variation thereof. What this means is that we thereof. What this means is that we thereof. What this means is that we should probably spend about half of our should probably spend about half of our should probably spend about half of our work time standing and about half of it work time standing and about half of it work time standing and about half of it sitting. But not all sitting or not all standing. But not all sitting or not all standing. But not all sitting or not all standing. If you had to do all one or the other, If you had to do all one or the other, If you had to do all one or the other, standing is going to be better than standing is going to be better than standing is going to be better than sitting. What happens if we just stand? sitting. What happens if we just stand? sitting. What happens if we just stand? Well, that can also generate some Well, that can also generate some Well, that can also generate some postural issues in terms of postural issues in terms of postural issues in terms of stabilization and fatigue. You know, I stabilization and fatigue. You know, I stabilization and fatigue. You know, I have a good friend who's in the movement have a good friend who's in the movement have a good friend who's in the movement and physical rehabilitation and physical rehabilitation and physical rehabilitation and physiology spaces. His name is Kelly physiology spaces. His name is Kelly physiology spaces. His name is Kelly Starrett. He's very impressive in all those He's very impressive in all those He's very impressive in all those domains. And he always says, you know, domains. And he always says, you know, domains. And he always says, you know, we weren't designed to sit all day, but we weren't designed to sit all day, but we weren't designed to sit all day, but we also weren't designed to stand all we also weren't designed to stand all we also weren't designed to stand all day. And I think that's true. If we were day. And I think that's true. If we were day. And I think that's true. If we were to look back at our species over tens or to look back at our species over tens or to look back at our species over tens or hundreds of thousands of years, we or hundreds of thousands of years, we or hundreds of thousands of years, we would find that indeed we did sit down. would find that indeed we did sit down. would find that indeed we did sit down. We did lie down. It wasn't that we were We did lie down. It wasn't that we were We did lie down. It wasn't that we were standing all day long. That said, most standing all day long. That said, most standing all day long. That said, most everybody, at least in the US, is not everybody, at least in the US, is not everybody, at least in the US, is not getting sufficient cardiovascular getting sufficient cardiovascular getting sufficient cardiovascular exercise or movement throughout the day. exercise or movement throughout the day. exercise or movement throughout the day. And standing at one's desk can improve And standing at one's desk can improve And standing at one's desk can improve some of those health metrics and again some of those health metrics and again some of those health metrics and again can improve productivity. Probably can improve productivity. Probably can improve productivity. Probably because of those postural effects that I because of those postural effects that I because of those postural effects that I talked about earlier. That when we lie talked about earlier. That when we lie talked about earlier. That when we lie down, there tends to be less alertness down, there tends to be less alertness down, there tends to be less alertness in our in our brainstem, if you will. in our in our brainstem, if you will. in our in our brainstem, if you will. There's less activation of those There's less activation of those There's less activation of those brainstem circuits involved in brainstem circuits involved in brainstem circuits involved in alertness. And indeed, the circuits that alertness. And indeed, the circuits that alertness. And indeed, the circuits that involve a kind of a calming effect on involve a kind of a calming effect on involve a kind of a calming effect on the body get activated and as we become the body get activated and as we become the body get activated and as we become upright standing or seat or sitting but standing or seat or sitting but standing or seat or sitting but especially standing then those brain especially standing then those brain especially standing then those brain stem circuits for alertness kick on stem circuits for alertness kick on stem circuits for alertness kick on which are going to make it easier to which are going to make it easier to which are going to make it easier to remain focused. remain focused. remain focused. If you are going to start standing for If you are going to start standing for If you are going to start standing for half of your work time, you will notice half of your work time, you will notice half of your work time, you will notice that it takes a few days to adapt. that it takes a few days to adapt. that it takes a few days to adapt. You'll notice a lot of shifting from You'll notice a lot of shifting from You'll notice a lot of shifting from side to side. side to side. side to side. You definitely want to wear comfortable You definitely want to wear comfortable You definitely want to wear comfortable shoes. Some people will do this on a shoes. Some people will do this on a shoes. Some people will do this on a wooden floor. Other people feel wooden floor. Other people feel wooden floor. Other people feel uncomfortable unless they're on carpet. uncomfortable unless they're on carpet. uncomfortable unless they're on carpet. You have to figure out what works for You have to figure out what works for You have to figure out what works for you but it can take a little bit of time you but it can take a little bit of time you but it can take a little bit of time to adapt. I have to say after now about to adapt. I have to say after now about to adapt. I have to say after now about 10 years of working at a sit-stand desk, 10 years of working at a sit-stand desk, 10 years of working at a sit-stand desk, I find I can't sit for too long before I find I can't sit for too long before I find I can't sit for too long before I want to stand and my standing bouts can want to stand and my standing bouts can want to stand and my standing bouts can be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours be anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours although 2 hours would be a little bit although 2 hours would be a little bit although 2 hours would be a little bit long and then I catch myself kind of long and then I catch myself kind of long and then I catch myself kind of leaning on the desk off to the side. So, leaning on the desk off to the side. So, leaning on the desk off to the side. So, again the idea is to stand but not be again the idea is to stand but not be again the idea is to stand but not be leaning on the desk. Obviously, if leaning on the desk. Obviously, if leaning on the desk. Obviously, if you're typing or you're writing, you're typing or you're writing, you're typing or you're writing, there'll be some leaning involved but there'll be some leaning involved but there'll be some leaning involved but that's what the literature support. that's what the literature support. that's what the literature support. There is also a literature on whether or There is also a literature on whether or There is also a literature on whether or not physical movement under your desk not physical movement under your desk not physical movement under your desk meaning treadmilling or meaning treadmilling or meaning treadmilling or in fact there are now bicycles that in fact there are now bicycles that in fact there are now bicycles that allow people to pedal. It's kind of a allow people to pedal. It's kind of a allow people to pedal. It's kind of a unicycle like thing although not a unicycle like thing although not a unicycle like thing although not a unicycle under the desk can be unicycle under the desk can be unicycle under the desk can be beneficial for workplace performance. beneficial for workplace performance. beneficial for workplace performance. So, let's take a look at what those data So, let's take a look at what those data So, let's take a look at what those data say. The study that I'm referring to has say. The study that I'm referring to has say. The study that I'm referring to has a first author Frodsham F R O D S H A M a first author Frodsham F R O D S H A M a first author Frodsham F R O D S H A M Frodsham et al. This is a research Frodsham et al. This is a research Frodsham et al. This is a research article published in article published in article published in PLoS One and the title of the article is PLoS One and the title of the article is PLoS One and the title of the article is does type of active workstation matter? does type of active workstation matter? does type of active workstation matter? A randomized comparison of cognitive and A randomized comparison of cognitive and A randomized comparison of cognitive and typing performance between rest, cycling typing performance between rest, cycling typing performance between rest, cycling and treadmill active workstations. It's and treadmill active workstations. It's and treadmill active workstations. It's amazing that people do this science. I amazing that people do this science. I amazing that people do this science. I think it's great. think it's great. think it's great. Where else would we get peer-reviewed Where else would we get peer-reviewed Where else would we get peer-reviewed data on these types of questions? data on these types of questions? data on these types of questions? First things first, there were no First things first, there were no First things first, there were no significant differences between cycling significant differences between cycling significant differences between cycling or treadmill workstations on any or treadmill workstations on any or treadmill workstations on any cognitive or typing outcomes. So, it cognitive or typing outcomes. So, it cognitive or typing outcomes. So, it does not seem to matter whether or not does not seem to matter whether or not does not seem to matter whether or not people are treadmilling under the desk, people are treadmilling under the desk, people are treadmilling under the desk, so these would be stationary treadmills. so these would be stationary treadmills. so these would be stationary treadmills. It's like a little conveyor that people It's like a little conveyor that people It's like a little conveyor that people are walking on. Sometimes very slowly. I are walking on. Sometimes very slowly. I are walking on. Sometimes very slowly. I get I'm guessing some people walk more get I'm guessing some people walk more get I'm guessing some people walk more quickly. The New Yorkers probably quickly. The New Yorkers probably quickly. The New Yorkers probably treadmill quicker. The Californians treadmill quicker. The Californians treadmill quicker. The Californians probably treadmill a little slower. probably treadmill a little slower. probably treadmill a little slower. I'm a Californian, so I can make that I'm a Californian, so I can make that I'm a Californian, so I can make that {quote} {unquote} joke. But nonetheless, {quote} {unquote} joke. But nonetheless, {quote} {unquote} joke. But nonetheless, there were no significant differences there were no significant differences there were no significant differences between that and a cycling station where between that and a cycling station where between that and a cycling station where people are sitting and pedaling as they people are sitting and pedaling as they people are sitting and pedaling as they type away. type away. type away. Or as they work, or as they are on phone Or as they work, or as they are on phone Or as they work, or as they are on phone calls, etc. So, it really doesn't seem calls, etc. So, it really doesn't seem calls, etc. So, it really doesn't seem to matter. So, if you're going to matter. So, if you're going to matter. So, if you're going to embrace these active workstations if as embrace these active workstations if as embrace these active workstations if as they're called, they're called, they're called, just decide what you would prefer to just decide what you would prefer to just decide what you would prefer to use. It doesn't seem to matter in terms use. It doesn't seem to matter in terms use. It doesn't seem to matter in terms of outcomes. Now, this study involved of outcomes. Now, this study involved of outcomes. Now, this study involved looking at 137 looking at 137 looking at 137 young adults. young adults. young adults. They had multiple sessions where they at They had multiple sessions where they at They had multiple sessions where they at first completed cognitive and typing first completed cognitive and typing first completed cognitive and typing tests. These tests have different names tests. These tests have different names tests. These tests have different names and you're welcome to look those up if and you're welcome to look those up if and you're welcome to look those up if you like. you like. you like. Um as well as flanker tasks. So, these Um as well as flanker tasks. So, these Um as well as flanker tasks. So, these are tasks of attention and things of are tasks of attention and things of are tasks of attention and things of that sort. that sort. that sort. And then they either engaged in And then they either engaged in And then they either engaged in treadmill or cycling and then there was treadmill or cycling and then there was treadmill or cycling and then there was a comparison. a comparison. a comparison. And the statistics were run and And the statistics were run and And the statistics were run and basically what they found was there was basically what they found was there was basically what they found was there was a statistically significant improvement a statistically significant improvement a statistically significant improvement in attention and cognitive control in attention and cognitive control in attention and cognitive control scores during any kind of active session scores during any kind of active session scores during any kind of active session as opposed to just a mere seated as opposed to just a mere seated as opposed to just a mere seated session. Okay, so they compared seated to cycling Okay, so they compared seated to cycling Okay, so they compared seated to cycling to treadmill. However, to treadmill. However, to treadmill. However, verbal memory scores actually got worse verbal memory scores actually got worse verbal memory scores actually got worse during active sessions. So, I'll repeat during active sessions. So, I'll repeat during active sessions. So, I'll repeat that. Treadmilling or the cycling workstations Treadmilling or the cycling workstations Treadmilling or the cycling workstations improved attention and cognitive control improved attention and cognitive control improved attention and cognitive control scores as compared to people that were scores as compared to people that were scores as compared to people that were just seated and working. However, verbal just seated and working. However, verbal just seated and working. However, verbal memory scores got worse during the memory scores got worse during the memory scores got worse during the active sessions. And again, just to active sessions. And again, just to active sessions. And again, just to repeat, there was no difference between repeat, there was no difference between repeat, there was no difference between cycling and treadmill workstations. So, cycling and treadmill workstations. So, cycling and treadmill workstations. So, this is interesting. It suggests that as this is interesting. It suggests that as this is interesting. It suggests that as the authors say that active the authors say that active the authors say that active workstations, whether walking or workstations, whether walking or workstations, whether walking or cycling, are not only useful to improve caloric are not only useful to improve caloric are not only useful to improve caloric output and physical activity, output and physical activity, output and physical activity, circulation, and so on, But, circulation, and so on, But, circulation, and so on, But, particularly when completing tasks like particularly when completing tasks like particularly when completing tasks like cognitive tasks or tasks that require cognitive tasks or tasks that require cognitive tasks or tasks that require focus that do not require verbal memory focus that do not require verbal memory focus that do not require verbal memory recall. Now, why verbal memory recall recall. Now, why verbal memory recall recall. Now, why verbal memory recall was negatively impacted, was negatively impacted, was negatively impacted, uh we don't know. Could be because uh we don't know. Could be because uh we don't know. Could be because people were breathing a little bit people were breathing a little bit people were breathing a little bit harder. Could be that there's something harder. Could be that there's something harder. Could be that there's something about walking and talking that seems uh about walking and talking that seems uh about walking and talking that seems uh incompatible in the nervous system, incompatible in the nervous system, incompatible in the nervous system, although I'm not aware of that. I know a although I'm not aware of that. I know a although I'm not aware of that. I know a number of people who can walk and talk number of people who can walk and talk number of people who can walk and talk at the same time. But, at the same time. But, at the same time. But, if you are going to if you are going to if you are going to explore these treadmills or you're going explore these treadmills or you're going explore these treadmills or you're going to explore these cycling stations, you to explore these cycling stations, you to explore these cycling stations, you probably wouldn't want to do that for probably wouldn't want to do that for probably wouldn't want to do that for highly verbal work, maybe more for highly verbal work, maybe more for highly verbal work, maybe more for mathematical work or for analytic work mathematical work or for analytic work mathematical work or for analytic work or even creative work. But, anything or even creative work. But, anything or even creative work. But, anything that involves very precise or detailed that involves very precise or detailed that involves very precise or detailed verbal recall, verbal recall, verbal recall, sitting or standing seems to be the sitting or standing seems to be the sitting or standing seems to be the better option. And if you're wondering better option. And if you're wondering better option. And if you're wondering why cycling or treadmilling would why cycling or treadmilling would why cycling or treadmilling would enhance various aspects of cognition, we enhance various aspects of cognition, we enhance various aspects of cognition, we can speculate. can speculate. can speculate. I've talked before about this, but I've talked before about this, but I've talked before about this, but anytime we are generating forward anytime we are generating forward anytime we are generating forward movement through our own actions, our movement through our own actions, our movement through our own actions, our own efforts, own efforts, own efforts, typically if we are outside, we're not typically if we are outside, we're not typically if we are outside, we're not on a treadmill or we're on a bicycle or on a treadmill or we're on a bicycle or on a treadmill or we're on a bicycle or we're running or even on a motorcycle or we're running or even on a motorcycle or we're running or even on a motorcycle or in a car, we have what's called optic in a car, we have what's called optic in a car, we have what's called optic flow. And that optic flow flow. And that optic flow flow. And that optic flow is known to quiet certain areas of the is known to quiet certain areas of the is known to quiet certain areas of the brain that are associated with vigilance brain that are associated with vigilance brain that are associated with vigilance and indeed fear. This is the basis of and indeed fear. This is the basis of and indeed fear. This is the basis of things like EMDR, eye movement things like EMDR, eye movement things like EMDR, eye movement desensitization reprocessing. desensitization reprocessing. desensitization reprocessing. However, the mere act of However, the mere act of However, the mere act of engaging what are called our central engaging what are called our central engaging what are called our central pattern generators, the neurons in our pattern generators, the neurons in our pattern generators, the neurons in our brain stem and in our spinal cord that brain stem and in our spinal cord that brain stem and in our spinal cord that engage repetitive movements, engage repetitive movements, engage repetitive movements, also can reduce some of the areas of the also can reduce some of the areas of the also can reduce some of the areas of the brain that are associated with anxiety brain that are associated with anxiety brain that are associated with anxiety and vigilance. So, one pure speculation, and vigilance. So, one pure speculation, and vigilance. So, one pure speculation, but nonetheless grounded speculation, but nonetheless grounded speculation, but nonetheless grounded speculation, would be that treadmilling or cycling at would be that treadmilling or cycling at would be that treadmilling or cycling at a desk would reduce anxiety that would a desk would reduce anxiety that would a desk would reduce anxiety that would allow performance to improve. The other, allow performance to improve. The other, allow performance to improve. The other, what I think is more likely explanation, what I think is more likely explanation, what I think is more likely explanation, is that anytime we are in ambulation, we is that anytime we are in ambulation, we is that anytime we are in ambulation, we recruit the release of recruit the release of recruit the release of neuromodulators like epinephrine, neuromodulators like epinephrine, neuromodulators like epinephrine, dopamine, and things of that sort that dopamine, and things of that sort that dopamine, and things of that sort that further increase overall levels of further increase overall levels of further increase overall levels of alertness. I think that's the more alertness. I think that's the more alertness. I think that's the more likely explanation because it's hard to likely explanation because it's hard to likely explanation because it's hard to imagine how just a reduction in anxiety imagine how just a reduction in anxiety imagine how just a reduction in anxiety could lead to these improvements in could lead to these improvements in could lead to these improvements in cognition in a direct way. Whereas the cognition in a direct way. Whereas the cognition in a direct way. Whereas the subjects in the study I just mentioned subjects in the study I just mentioned subjects in the study I just mentioned on average experienced an increase in on average experienced an increase in on average experienced an increase in cognitive performance merely by cognitive performance merely by cognitive performance merely by movement, okay? And this does not movement, okay? And this does not movement, okay? And this does not include any optic flow because it's include any optic flow because it's include any optic flow because it's stationary, the treadmill or the cyclist stationary, the treadmill or the cyclist stationary, the treadmill or the cyclist stationary. And so we can rule out that stationary. And so we can rule out that stationary. And so we can rule out that optic flow and that points to the idea optic flow and that points to the idea optic flow and that points to the idea that when we are in movement, we recruit that when we are in movement, we recruit that when we are in movement, we recruit neuromodulators associated with the neuromodulators associated with the neuromodulators associated with the so-called reticular activating system, so-called reticular activating system, so-called reticular activating system, the striatal system, and so forth that the striatal system, and so forth that the striatal system, and so forth that would place the brain into some pattern. would place the brain into some pattern. would place the brain into some pattern. We don't know. We only can speculate We don't know. We only can speculate We don't know. We only can speculate some pattern, perhaps it's gamma waves some pattern, perhaps it's gamma waves some pattern, perhaps it's gamma waves or some other wave pattern that would or some other wave pattern that would or some other wave pattern that would engage heightened levels of focus and engage heightened levels of focus and engage heightened levels of focus and attention. Nonetheless, attention. Nonetheless, attention. Nonetheless, treadmilling, cycling at a desk does improve cycling at a desk does improve cycling at a desk does improve cognition. So we've been discussing cognition. So we've been discussing cognition. So we've been discussing workspace optimization with the workspace optimization with the workspace optimization with the understanding that you're not always understanding that you're not always understanding that you're not always going to work in the same place every going to work in the same place every going to work in the same place every day. What I've tried to do is give you a set What I've tried to do is give you a set What I've tried to do is give you a set of high-potency tools that can improve of high-potency tools that can improve of high-potency tools that can improve your focus and cognition and to place your focus and cognition and to place your focus and cognition and to place that within a framework for particular that within a framework for particular that within a framework for particular kinds of work. Let's just review some of kinds of work. Let's just review some of kinds of work. Let's just review some of the basic elements of what we've covered the basic elements of what we've covered the basic elements of what we've covered today. First of all, today. First of all, today. First of all, in the first part of your day, that 0 to in the first part of your day, that 0 to in the first part of your day, that 0 to 9 hours after waking, you want bright 9 hours after waking, you want bright 9 hours after waking, you want bright lights, especially overhead lights, as lights, especially overhead lights, as lights, especially overhead lights, as bright as you can keep them without bright as you can keep them without bright as you can keep them without feeling uncomfortable or certainly not feeling uncomfortable or certainly not feeling uncomfortable or certainly not without feeling any pain in your eyes or without feeling any pain in your eyes or without feeling any pain in your eyes or elsewhere in your body. Bright lights elsewhere in your body. Bright lights elsewhere in your body. Bright lights will make for the maximum state of will make for the maximum state of will make for the maximum state of alertness. In addition, In addition, In addition, try and place whatever it is that you're try and place whatever it is that you're try and place whatever it is that you're focusing on directly in front of you but focusing on directly in front of you but focusing on directly in front of you but not have it extend too far out to either not have it extend too far out to either not have it extend too far out to either side of your eyes. side of your eyes. side of your eyes. Try and generate a fairly restricted Try and generate a fairly restricted Try and generate a fairly restricted visual window, as we call it. And if you visual window, as we call it. And if you visual window, as we call it. And if you can, try and place whatever it is you're can, try and place whatever it is you're can, try and place whatever it is you're focusing on at least at nose level or focusing on at least at nose level or focusing on at least at nose level or above. That might take some engineering above. That might take some engineering above. That might take some engineering or some ingenuity and creativity in or some ingenuity and creativity in or some ingenuity and creativity in order to figure out how to do that, but order to figure out how to do that, but order to figure out how to do that, but that's going to be most beneficial. that's going to be most beneficial. that's going to be most beneficial. Try and avoid reclining, try and avoid Try and avoid reclining, try and avoid Try and avoid reclining, try and avoid sitting, try and stand for at least half sitting, try and stand for at least half sitting, try and stand for at least half of your work day. That's a good goal, of your work day. That's a good goal, of your work day. That's a good goal, and it may take some time to work up to and it may take some time to work up to and it may take some time to work up to that goal. that goal. that goal. In addition, if you're going to use In addition, if you're going to use In addition, if you're going to use sound as a stimulus for increasing focus sound as a stimulus for increasing focus sound as a stimulus for increasing focus and alertness, try and avoid exposure to and alertness, try and avoid exposure to and alertness, try and avoid exposure to white noise, pink noise, or brown noise white noise, pink noise, or brown noise white noise, pink noise, or brown noise for extended periods of time, for more for extended periods of time, for more for extended periods of time, for more than an hour or so. That might actually than an hour or so. That might actually than an hour or so. That might actually be damaging to the auditory system, and be damaging to the auditory system, and be damaging to the auditory system, and at the very least is kind of stressful, at the very least is kind of stressful, at the very least is kind of stressful, even though you might not notice it. even though you might not notice it. even though you might not notice it. It's kind of a background level of It's kind of a background level of It's kind of a background level of anxiety and stress that is not going to anxiety and stress that is not going to anxiety and stress that is not going to serve you well. Rather, if you're going serve you well. Rather, if you're going serve you well. Rather, if you're going to pursue particular types of sound to pursue particular types of sound to pursue particular types of sound frequencies, consider using 40 Hz frequencies, consider using 40 Hz frequencies, consider using 40 Hz binaural beats, not monaural beats, but binaural beats, not monaural beats, but binaural beats, not monaural beats, but 40 Hz binaural beats done during a 40 Hz binaural beats done during a 40 Hz binaural beats done during a particular work bout, or for 30 minutes particular work bout, or for 30 minutes particular work bout, or for 30 minutes prior to that work bout. I would not prior to that work bout. I would not prior to that work bout. I would not rely on binaural beats all the time, rely on binaural beats all the time, rely on binaural beats all the time, every day. I think that could cause them every day. I think that could cause them every day. I think that could cause them to lose their potency, just because of to lose their potency, just because of to lose their potency, just because of the way the auditory system attenuates. the way the auditory system attenuates. the way the auditory system attenuates. And actually, if you've experienced that And actually, if you've experienced that And actually, if you've experienced that attenuation, the mere fact that you can attenuation, the mere fact that you can attenuation, the mere fact that you can go into an environment where there's an go into an environment where there's an go into an environment where there's an air conditioner blowing, air conditioner blowing, air conditioner blowing, and then it stops, and you feel blowing, and then it stops, and you feel blowing, and then it stops, and you feel that relaxation, but you weren't that relaxation, but you weren't that relaxation, but you weren't thinking about the air conditioner thinking about the air conditioner thinking about the air conditioner before, tells you that your auditory before, tells you that your auditory before, tells you that your auditory system had kind of attenuated to it, and system had kind of attenuated to it, and system had kind of attenuated to it, and yet it was still impacting your system. yet it was still impacting your system. yet it was still impacting your system. You were sensing it, we would say, but You were sensing it, we would say, but You were sensing it, we would say, but not perceiving it. not perceiving it. not perceiving it. There are other things that you can do There are other things that you can do There are other things that you can do to improve your work space optimization, to improve your work space optimization, to improve your work space optimization, such as such as such as standing for half the day, as I standing for half the day, as I standing for half the day, as I mentioned before. But, if you're mentioned before. But, if you're mentioned before. But, if you're interested in this, or you feel like it interested in this, or you feel like it interested in this, or you feel like it suits you, to treadmill, find a suits you, to treadmill, find a suits you, to treadmill, find a stationary treadmill that you can walk stationary treadmill that you can walk stationary treadmill that you can walk on. I've never tried this before. Uh, on. I've never tried this before. Uh, on. I've never tried this before. Uh, maybe after this episode, given what maybe after this episode, given what maybe after this episode, given what I've read in the peer-reviewed research, I've read in the peer-reviewed research, I've read in the peer-reviewed research, and uh, it's pretty compelling, that and uh, it's pretty compelling, that and uh, it's pretty compelling, that treadmilling seems like an interesting, treadmilling seems like an interesting, treadmilling seems like an interesting, uh, way to increase alertness and uh, way to increase alertness and uh, way to increase alertness and cognitive performance. cognitive performance. cognitive performance. I'm not sure that I would do the cycling I'm not sure that I would do the cycling I'm not sure that I would do the cycling method, cuz I can't imagine just cycling method, cuz I can't imagine just cycling method, cuz I can't imagine just cycling and typing at the same time. That sort and typing at the same time. That sort and typing at the same time. That sort of feels like the, you know, like I of feels like the, you know, like I of feels like the, you know, like I actually can do the rub your tummy, pat actually can do the rub your tummy, pat actually can do the rub your tummy, pat your, top of your head kind of thing, your, top of your head kind of thing, your, top of your head kind of thing, but, uh, it still feels like a little but, uh, it still feels like a little but, uh, it still feels like a little bit of a uh, a sort of a cognitive motor bit of a uh, a sort of a cognitive motor bit of a uh, a sort of a cognitive motor collision for me uh for whatever reason, collision for me uh for whatever reason, collision for me uh for whatever reason, but that's just my bias I do know how to but that's just my bias I do know how to but that's just my bias I do know how to ride a bicycle, but anyway, you pick ride a bicycle, but anyway, you pick ride a bicycle, but anyway, you pick your preference. Some other things that your preference. Some other things that your preference. Some other things that you could do in order to you could do in order to you could do in order to improve your workplace performance would improve your workplace performance would improve your workplace performance would be to consider the cathedral effect. If be to consider the cathedral effect. If be to consider the cathedral effect. If you're going to do analytic work for any you're going to do analytic work for any you're going to do analytic work for any part of the day, phase one or phase two part of the day, phase one or phase two part of the day, phase one or phase two as I described them, but really in any as I described them, but really in any as I described them, but really in any time of day that detailed analytic work time of day that detailed analytic work time of day that detailed analytic work for which there is a correct answer, for which there is a correct answer, for which there is a correct answer, learning scales of music, learning scales of music, learning scales of music, learning mathematics, trying to figure out the mathematics, trying to figure out the mathematics, trying to figure out the solution to a problem where there is solution to a problem where there is solution to a problem where there is indeed a solution. It could be an indeed a solution. It could be an indeed a solution. It could be an interpersonal problem as well, then try interpersonal problem as well, then try interpersonal problem as well, then try and get into an environment with a and get into an environment with a and get into an environment with a relatively low ceiling. If you don't relatively low ceiling. If you don't relatively low ceiling. If you don't have access to a low ceiling have access to a low ceiling have access to a low ceiling environment, you might consider using a environment, you might consider using a environment, you might consider using a brimmed hat or even a hoodie or even brimmed hat or even a hoodie or even brimmed hat or even a hoodie or even just facing down or even putting your hand facing down or even putting your hand facing down or even putting your hand above uh above your eyes as you will as above uh above your eyes as you will as above uh above your eyes as you will as at the level of your of your eyebrows. at the level of your of your eyebrows. at the level of your of your eyebrows. In other words, lower the ceiling. In other words, lower the ceiling. In other words, lower the ceiling. That's the basis of the cathedral That's the basis of the cathedral That's the basis of the cathedral effects of on analytic performance. effects of on analytic performance. effects of on analytic performance. In contrast, if you're interested in In contrast, if you're interested in In contrast, if you're interested in doing brainstorming, creative work, you're brainstorming, creative work, you're brainstorming, creative work, you're writing new things, you're creating new writing new things, you're creating new writing new things, you're creating new things of any kind, artwork, consider things of any kind, artwork, consider things of any kind, artwork, consider getting into a high ceiling or no getting into a high ceiling or no getting into a high ceiling or no ceiling environment. ceiling environment. ceiling environment. Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or Or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that back. Again, the data within the peer-reviewed Again, the data within the peer-reviewed Again, the data within the peer-reviewed literature are there to support these literature are there to support these literature are there to support these sorts of practices. And if you'd like to sorts of practices. And if you'd like to sorts of practices. And if you'd like to start layering these protocols, by all start layering these protocols, by all start layering these protocols, by all means, please do that. There's no reason means, please do that. There's no reason means, please do that. There's no reason why you couldn't do one or just two of why you couldn't do one or just two of why you couldn't do one or just two of these protocols. There's no reason why, these protocols. There's no reason why, these protocols. There's no reason why, for instance, you couldn't use binaural for instance, you couldn't use binaural for instance, you couldn't use binaural beats and try and get into a low-ceiling beats and try and get into a low-ceiling beats and try and get into a low-ceiling environment to do detailed work uh environment to do detailed work uh environment to do detailed work uh couple times a week, but you could also couple times a week, but you could also couple times a week, but you could also employ all of these. Now, of course, employ all of these. Now, of course, employ all of these. Now, of course, there are an enormous number of other there are an enormous number of other there are an enormous number of other things that you can do to improve work things that you can do to improve work things that you can do to improve work performance and productivity, and I've performance and productivity, and I've performance and productivity, and I've talked about those in previous episodes, talked about those in previous episodes, talked about those in previous episodes, in particular in the episode on focus in particular in the episode on focus in particular in the episode on focus and the episode on motivation. There are and the episode on motivation. There are and the episode on motivation. There are supplements you can take that can supplements you can take that can supplements you can take that can increase dopamine, for instance. There increase dopamine, for instance. There increase dopamine, for instance. There are tools that you can use to are tools that you can use to are tools that you can use to increase your focus, For instance, increase your focus, For instance, increase your focus, For instance, focusing your visual attention on one focusing your visual attention on one focusing your visual attention on one location for 30 to 60 seconds prior to location for 30 to 60 seconds prior to location for 30 to 60 seconds prior to entering a focused work bout. This has entering a focused work bout. This has entering a focused work bout. This has been shown again and again through work been shown again and again through work been shown again and again through work from Emily Balcetis at NYU. In the from Emily Balcetis at NYU. In the from Emily Balcetis at NYU. In the episode on focus, I cited a number of episode on focus, I cited a number of episode on focus, I cited a number of studies where this has actually been studies where this has actually been studies where this has actually been tested and deployed in various schools, tested and deployed in various schools, tested and deployed in various schools, having kids do a focus task where they having kids do a focus task where they having kids do a focus task where they look at a particular visual target for look at a particular visual target for look at a particular visual target for 30 to 60 seconds, then doing some 30 to 60 seconds, then doing some 30 to 60 seconds, then doing some mathematics, and seeing pretty mathematics, and seeing pretty mathematics, and seeing pretty impressive improvement in focus and impressive improvement in focus and impressive improvement in focus and attention, even in people that have attention, even in people that have attention, even in people that have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and so on. So, there's no reason why you and so on. So, there's no reason why you and so on. So, there's no reason why you can't and shouldn't combine the sort of can't and shouldn't combine the sort of can't and shouldn't combine the sort of practical workspace optimization practical workspace optimization practical workspace optimization solutions that we talked about today solutions that we talked about today solutions that we talked about today with the kind of neural optimization with the kind of neural optimization with the kind of neural optimization solutions that we talked about in the solutions that we talked about in the solutions that we talked about in the episode on focus, in the episode on episode on focus, in the episode on episode on focus, in the episode on ADHD, in the episode on motivation. By ADHD, in the episode on motivation. By ADHD, in the episode on motivation. By all means, layer those together. That's all means, layer those together. That's all means, layer those together. That's how you're going to achieve the optimal how you're going to achieve the optimal how you're going to achieve the optimal focus bouts. That's how you're going to focus bouts. That's how you're going to focus bouts. That's how you're going to achieve the optimal achieve the optimal achieve the optimal creativity bouts. I do want to creativity bouts. I do want to creativity bouts. I do want to acknowledge again the fact that realize acknowledge again the fact that realize acknowledge again the fact that realize people are showing up to this challenge people are showing up to this challenge people are showing up to this challenge of workspace optimization with different of workspace optimization with different of workspace optimization with different budgets, with different constraints. budgets, with different constraints. budgets, with different constraints. Some people have kids at home, there are Some people have kids at home, there are Some people have kids at home, there are a lot of interruptions, some people do a lot of interruptions, some people do a lot of interruptions, some people do not. Nonetheless, I hope that the information Nonetheless, I hope that the information Nonetheless, I hope that the information I was able to provide today will allow I was able to provide today will allow I was able to provide today will allow you to make subtle or maybe even drastic you to make subtle or maybe even drastic you to make subtle or maybe even drastic rearrangements in your workspace rearrangements in your workspace rearrangements in your workspace environment. There's one other point environment. There's one other point environment. There's one other point related to that I did not cover and related to that I did not cover and related to that I did not cover and that I'd like to cover just briefly, that I'd like to cover just briefly, that I'd like to cover just briefly, which is that there's nothing to say which is that there's nothing to say which is that there's nothing to say that you have to always work in the same that you have to always work in the same that you have to always work in the same location all the time. You can move from location all the time. You can move from location all the time. You can move from house to cafe if that works for you. You house to cafe if that works for you. You house to cafe if that works for you. You can move from office to home. You can move from office to home. You can move from office to home. You can also move from different locations also move from different locations also move from different locations within your home. I have a brief within your home. I have a brief within your home. I have a brief anecdote about this. I used to attend a anecdote about this. I used to attend a anecdote about this. I used to attend a lot of scientific meetings when a lot of lot of scientific meetings when a lot of lot of scientific meetings when a lot of scientific meetings were in person, and scientific meetings were in person, and scientific meetings were in person, and there were always a few individuals that there were always a few individuals that there were always a few individuals that seemed to stay engaged throughout these seemed to stay engaged throughout these seemed to stay engaged throughout these very long meetings. You know, we're very long meetings. You know, we're very long meetings. You know, we're talking 7-8 hour days, sometimes evening talking 7-8 hour days, sometimes evening talking 7-8 hour days, sometimes evening sessions, and sometimes sessions, and sometimes sessions, and sometimes these meetings would go on for, you these meetings would go on for, you these meetings would go on for, you know, four or five, or even six days. know, four or five, or even six days. know, four or five, or even six days. These were long meetings and the quality These were long meetings and the quality These were long meetings and the quality of talks varied tremendously and I of talks varied tremendously and I of talks varied tremendously and I always noticed the individuals that always noticed the individuals that always noticed the individuals that managed to stay engaged and awake for managed to stay engaged and awake for managed to stay engaged and awake for the entire meeting. the entire meeting. the entire meeting. And I And I And I noticed that people that could maintain noticed that people that could maintain noticed that people that could maintain high levels of alertness in this one high levels of alertness in this one high levels of alertness in this one conference room had a habit of moving to conference room had a habit of moving to conference room had a habit of moving to a different seat after each session, a different seat after each session, a different seat after each session, sometimes even between talks. And I sometimes even between talks. And I sometimes even between talks. And I actually discussed this with one of my actually discussed this with one of my actually discussed this with one of my colleagues who was doing this. I said, colleagues who was doing this. I said, colleagues who was doing this. I said, "Is this conscious or you always moving "Is this conscious or you always moving "Is this conscious or you always moving from place to place?" And they said, "If from place to place?" And they said, "If from place to place?" And they said, "If I just stay in one place and I just look I just stay in one place and I just look I just stay in one place and I just look from this one particular visual angle at from this one particular visual angle at from this one particular visual angle at the screen, I find after one or two the screen, I find after one or two the screen, I find after one or two talks, regardless of how interesting the talks, regardless of how interesting the talks, regardless of how interesting the talks are, talks are, talks are, that I start to kind of drift, my mind that I start to kind of drift, my mind that I start to kind of drift, my mind isn't as engaged and indeed sometimes isn't as engaged and indeed sometimes isn't as engaged and indeed sometimes can fall asleep." And so I started this can fall asleep." And so I started this can fall asleep." And so I started this practice of moving from space to space practice of moving from space to space practice of moving from space to space or I should say seat to seat within an or I should say seat to seat within an or I should say seat to seat within an auditorium and it works quite well. And auditorium and it works quite well. And auditorium and it works quite well. And I think it works quite well because I think it works quite well because I think it works quite well because again of the relationship between again of the relationship between again of the relationship between our visual system driving the majority our visual system driving the majority our visual system driving the majority of our cognition, of our cognition, of our cognition, right? Our visual system drives our right? Our visual system drives our right? Our visual system drives our thinking and that novel visual thinking and that novel visual thinking and that novel visual environments are going to lend themselves to are going to lend themselves to are going to lend themselves to heightened levels of alertness. heightened levels of alertness. heightened levels of alertness. Now, you don't want things to be so Now, you don't want things to be so Now, you don't want things to be so novel and scary or threatening or novel and scary or threatening or novel and scary or threatening or anxiety-provoking or loud that they draw anxiety-provoking or loud that they draw anxiety-provoking or loud that they draw your attention away from your work, but your attention away from your work, but your attention away from your work, but I think this is part of the reason why I think this is part of the reason why I think this is part of the reason why turning on music or moving to an office turning on music or moving to an office turning on music or moving to an office or a cafe or an outdoor environment from or a cafe or an outdoor environment from or a cafe or an outdoor environment from an indoor environment or vice versa, an indoor environment or vice versa, an indoor environment or vice versa, maybe even within a single day, can maybe even within a single day, can maybe even within a single day, can bring about more heightened levels of bring about more heightened levels of bring about more heightened levels of productivity. I'd also like to productivity. I'd also like to productivity. I'd also like to acknowledge that what I covered today is acknowledge that what I covered today is acknowledge that what I covered today is most certainly not exhaustive for all most certainly not exhaustive for all most certainly not exhaustive for all the types of workspace optimization the types of workspace optimization the types of workspace optimization tools that one could create. tools that one could create. tools that one could create. For that reason, I'd love for you to For that reason, I'd love for you to For that reason, I'd love for you to suggest any of your workspace suggest any of your workspace suggest any of your workspace optimization tools that you found optimization tools that you found optimization tools that you found useful. Please put those in the comment useful. Please put those in the comment useful. Please put those in the comment section on YouTube. That would be the section on YouTube. That would be the section on YouTube. That would be the best place, then other people can see best place, then other people can see best place, then other people can see them. I'll also read through those and them. I'll also read through those and them. I'll also read through those and perhaps in a future episode I'll call perhaps in a future episode I'll call perhaps in a future episode I'll call about some of the ones that I've tried about some of the ones that I've tried about some of the ones that I've tried on the basis of your suggestions. If on the basis of your suggestions. If on the basis of your suggestions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. Also, on zero-cost way to support us. Also, on zero-cost way to support us. Also, on YouTube, you can put comments in the YouTube, you can put comments in the YouTube, you can put comments in the comment section. So, give us feedback. comment section. So, give us feedback. comment section. So, give us feedback. You can make suggestions for future You can make suggestions for future You can make suggestions for future guests that you'd like us to host on the guests that you'd like us to host on the guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And in general, Huberman Lab Podcast. And in general, Huberman Lab Podcast. And in general, you can ask questions. We do eventually you can ask questions. We do eventually you can ask questions. We do eventually read all the comments, and they do read all the comments, and they do read all the comments, and they do influence our future content. Please influence our future content. Please influence our future content. Please also subscribe on Apple and or Spotify. also subscribe on Apple and or Spotify. also subscribe on Apple and or Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity And on Apple, you have the opportunity And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. to leave us up to a five-star review. to leave us up to a five-star review. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this mentioned at the beginning of this mentioned at the beginning of this podcast episode. That's the best way to podcast episode. That's the best way to podcast episode. That's the best way to support the podcast. We also have a support the podcast. We also have a support the podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's Patreon. It's Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there, you can support the podcast And there, you can support the podcast And there, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. We also have at any level that you like. We also have at any level that you like. We also have an Instagram and a Twitter account. It's an Instagram and a Twitter account. It's an Instagram and a Twitter account. It's Huberman Lab. And there, I teach Huberman Lab. And there, I teach Huberman Lab. And there, I teach neuroscience and neuroscience-related neuroscience and neuroscience-related neuroscience and neuroscience-related tools. Oftentimes, that information and tools. Oftentimes, that information and tools. Oftentimes, that information and those tools overlap with themes on the those tools overlap with themes on the those tools overlap with themes on the podcast, but sometimes they are distinct podcast, but sometimes they are distinct podcast, but sometimes they are distinct from themes and topics covered on the from themes and topics covered on the from themes and topics covered on the podcast. So, please follow us on podcast. So, please follow us on podcast. So, please follow us on Instagram and Twitter. This episode, we Instagram and Twitter. This episode, we Instagram and Twitter. This episode, we didn't talk too much about supplements, didn't talk too much about supplements, didn't talk too much about supplements, but on many previous episodes of the but on many previous episodes of the but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplementation. And while supplementation. And while supplementation. And while supplementation isn't required or great supplementation isn't required or great supplementation isn't required or great for everybody, some people do derive for everybody, some people do derive for everybody, some people do derive tremendous benefit from supplements. tremendous benefit from supplements. tremendous benefit from supplements. We've talked about supplements for We've talked about supplements for We've talked about supplements for focus, for sleep, for creativity, all focus, for sleep, for creativity, all focus, for sleep, for creativity, all sorts of things. sorts of things. sorts of things. If you'd like to see the supplements If you'd like to see the supplements If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that I take, you can go to Thorne, that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's t h o r n e.com/the letter that's t h o r n e.com/the letter that's t h o r n e.com/the letter u/huberman. There, you can see the u/huberman. There, you can see the u/huberman. There, you can see the supplements that I take. You can get 20% supplements that I take. You can get 20% supplements that I take. You can get 20% off those supplements. And if you off those supplements. And if you off those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site navigate deeper into the Thorne site navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that portal, Thorne, t h o r n through that portal, Thorne, t h o r n through that portal, Thorne, t h o r n e.com/the letter u/huberman, you can e.com/the letter u/huberman, you can e.com/the letter u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other also get 20% off any of the other also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. The supplements that Thorne makes. The supplements that Thorne makes. The reason we partner with Thorne is because reason we partner with Thorne is because reason we partner with Thorne is because one of the major issues in the one of the major issues in the one of the major issues in the supplement industry is that many of the supplement industry is that many of the supplement industry is that many of the supplements out there don't contain supplements out there don't contain supplements out there don't contain sufficient quantity, or they contain too sufficient quantity, or they contain too sufficient quantity, or they contain too much of a given supplement, and the much of a given supplement, and the much of a given supplement, and the quality of the ingredients can vary quality of the ingredients can vary quality of the ingredients can vary tremendously. With Thorne supplements, tremendously. With Thorne supplements, tremendously. With Thorne supplements, there's immense stringency in terms of there's immense stringency in terms of there's immense stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients and the quality of the ingredients and the quality of the ingredients and the precision of the amounts of precision of the amounts of precision of the amounts of ingredients that they include in each ingredients that they include in each ingredients that they include in each product. Once again, thank you for product. Once again, thank you for product. Once again, thank you for joining me for this discussion about the joining me for this discussion about the joining me for this discussion about the science and peer-reviewed literature on science and peer-reviewed literature on science and peer-reviewed literature on workspace optimization. I hope some, if workspace optimization. I hope some, if workspace optimization. I hope some, if not all, of the tools will be beneficial not all, of the tools will be beneficial not all, of the tools will be beneficial for you. And as always, thank you for you. And as always, thank you for you. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.