Jet lag is a significant physical and mental challenge. It is caused by rapid travel into different time zones, which disrupts the body's circadian rhythm (internal clock), causing a misalignment between your internal clock and the day/night cycle. The degree of disruption depends on the individual and the number of time zones you cross. Jet lag causes fatigue and mood fluctuations. It worsens with age. This newsletter explains how to quickly align with a new time zone to mitigate some of jet lag's effects.

Before You Travel East
Eastward travel is typically more challenging for the body to adapt to. Why? Most people find it easier to stay awake later than to fall asleep earlier. In the former, there’s more time to get the necessary light signals at the right times compared to the latter.

If you can, prepare for your trip and partially adjust your circadian rhythm before your eastward travel by using light, exercise and caffeine:

Get Early Light Exposure: When traveling east (say you’re flying from California to New York) you need to shift to waking up earlier than you normally would. Starting two days before you leave, try waking up 30 to 45 minutes prior to your usual wake-up time and view bright sunlight or bright artificial light as soon as you wake up.
Drink Caffeine Early: This will help promote alertness early in the day and make it much easier to shift to your new time zone when you fly east.
Getting Moving: Within 60 minutes of your new, earlier wake-up time, get some physical movement — even just some light jogging if you can’t do a full workout.
These three levers: light, caffeine and exercise will help adjust your circadian clock fast.

Before You Travel West
As mentioned earlier, westward travel tends to be easier for most people. That said, it can still help to adjust your circadian rhythm before your travel by using light, exercise and caffeine. In this case, however, you’ll want to shift everything to 30 to 45 minutes later in the day as opposed to earlier. A slightly later wake-up time, a slightly later caffeine intake in the morning and day (but still avoid caffeine in the eight to 10 hours prior to bedtime) and a slightly later workout — even just by 45 minutes, will all combine to help.

You’ll also want to make sure that you get bright light exposure to your eyes from artificial lights in the one to two hours after sunset. Remember, you’re trying to prepare to stay up later as you soon fly westward.

When You Arrive at Your New Destination (Regardless if You Flew East or West)
Eat Like a Local
Eating is a strong mechanism for entraining (setting) your circadian clock. Adopting the local meal schedule when you arrive — eating breakfast, lunch and dinner more or less at the same times as the locals, even if you’re not hungry — will help you shift to the new time zone.

Personally, I hate to eat when I’m not hungry (and love to eat when I am!), so I opt out of this protocol since it has me eating in my (subjective) middle of the night. That said, eating on the local schedule is known to work. If it works for you, go for it — you’ll shift faster. The earlier you can get on the local meal schedule, the better.

Many find it effective to fast for a period of 14 to 16 hours before the local breakfast time to best adopt the new eating schedule.

Time Your Light Exposure Correctly by Knowing Your Temperature Minimum
This is the power tool to shift your circadian clock fast, but it involves learning about your “temperature minimum” first.

Your temperature minimum is your lowest body temperature in each 24-hour cycle. You don’t need to measure your body temperature to know it, as it occurs approximately two hours before your usual wake-up time. If you typically wake up at 7 a.m., your temperature minimum is very likely to be between 4:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Know your temperature minimum by knowing your typical wake-up time, irrespective of whether you use an alarm clock. Again, this is a time, not a temperature.

Here's the key: If you get bright light exposure to your eyes in the one to two hours after your temperature minimum, you will adjust your circadian clock such that it will make you want to go to sleep earlier in the subsequent nights and wake up earlier in the subsequent mornings. Perfect for traveling east.

Conversely, if you get bright light exposure to your eyes in the one to two hours before your temperature minimum, you will shift your circadian clock such that it will make you want to go to sleep later and wake up later in the subsequent nights. Perfect for traveling west.

Here's the second key issue: We are referring to the time of your temperature minimum before you leave! This is vital to understand. Get it right and you’ll shift fast across time zones. Get it wrong and it can be a mess.

Why? Well, think about this. Imagine you fly from San Francisco to London (+8 hours). You land in the morning London time and the sun is out. Huberman said get morning sunlight in your eyes, right? Yes, but for the first two to three days in London before you adjust your clock, viewing that London morning sunlight is the same to your brain’s clock as getting a giant blast of light in your eyes at midnight San Francisco time.

So, guess what? You just made your body want to go to bed much later and wake up later. You got it backward. Many people sleep well their first night after flying east, wake up, see sunlight and the second night is a mess. They can’t sleep!

It would be better to wear dark sunglasses during the two to three hours before your temperature minimum for the first two days in London. However, be sure to get sunlight in your eyes during the afternoon London time, which is one to two hours after your temperature minimum.

Here, I am just using London as an example. You must figure it out based on your own travel. I know it sounds complicated, but if you know the time of your temperature minimum back home, and what is shared above, and you’ll nail this protocol easily.

Use Artificial Light & Red Lens Glasses
Of course, it’s often very cloudy, or you may land at night, and we can’t control the sunrise and sunset times — though if you can, please contact me. What you can do, however, is travel with a portable bright light device (you’ll want one with 5,000-10,000 lux brightness) to use to shift your clock. Remember that even when it is cloudy, sunlight through cloud cover is almost always far brighter than artificial lighting. Get outside and get that sunlight at the correct times and you’ll shift fast. Then, you can return to your standard “view sunlight in the (local) morning and (local) afternoon” to stay on the local schedule.

One thing we can all control is the brightness of our evening and nighttime environment. This can be implemented. When you want to sleep soon, reduce exposure to bright lights — especially blue and green (short wavelength) light. Alas, all LED lights are rich in blue and green wavelengths. For that reason, I wear red-lens glasses (Note: I helped ROKA design the Wind Down lens and they are a podcast sponsor) after sundown to help adjust to my local sleep schedule. Doing this is known to protect against the melatonin-reducing effects of bright light and to prevent the cortisol-increasing effects of bright light.

Maintain a Regular Exercise Schedule
While traveling, try to maintain a consistent early-in-the-day exercise routine (adjusted to the local time at your destination) to help reinforce your circadian rhythm and aid in quicker adjustment to the new time zone. Exercises might include light aerobic exercises like walking or more engaged activities depending on your fitness level and degree of jet lag.

Final Tip
For trips that last fewer than three days, staying on your home schedule may be beneficial to minimize disruptions to your circadian rhythm.

I hope these tips help you overcome any jet lag in your future travels — they've certainly helped me over the years.

As always, thank you for your interest in science!

Best wishes,
Andrew

