Thank you for joining the Huberman Lab Neural Network — a once-a-month newsletter with science and science-related tools for everyday life. This newsletter aims to provide you with actionable information in a condensed form.

In the episode "How to Enhance Performance & Learning by Applying a Growth Mindset," I discuss how to develop and apply a growth mindset — the process of rewarding effort, not results, as a means to improve learning and performance. Data show the positive consequences of a growth mindset are far-reaching. Many myths exist about a growth mindset. This newsletter teaches you how to use a growth mindset correctly.

What Is a Growth Mindset?
​Dr. Carol Dweck coined the term growth mindset to describe research on how to improve learning that is anchored in the belief that our abilities are malleable — and indeed they are (!) because our brains can continually learn and change throughout our lifespan (neuroplasticity).

Our understanding of our abilities and our narratives of why we are “good” and “bad” at certain things often arises out of the unconscious (or conscious) understanding of the types of feedback we receive early in life. There are two basic kinds of feedback; one is better for improving learning than the other.

Intelligence/Performance-based feedback is associated with identity labels. Praise involves telling a child (or adult) they’re smart and talented, learn things easily, or are really good at a particular skill. Identity-label feedback actually undermines effort and results in the long run! Most people don't realize this, and intelligence feedback is problematic because when we inevitably fail to perform well, we then assume it’s due to something central to our identity. For that and many other reasons, it’s generally good to avoid intelligence/performance-based feedback.
Effort-based feedback, on the other hand, is performance-enhancing and is always associated with “verb” (action) states. This type of praise focuses on persistence, effort, dedication or how a person kept working through an error or challenge. For example, saying, “That was a solid effort,” or “You’re pushing really hard to learn, which is so good!” or “It’s great the way you kept trying when you had a setback,” etc. is ideal for enhancing performance as it leads to more of what’s required to improve, and it generalizes to other scenarios.
Effort-based feedback is especially important when someone (or you) performs well, not just when someone falls short of a goal.
Enhance Results by Combining Growth Mindset with Stress-Is-Enhancing Mindset
The benefits of a growth mindset are greatly enhanced when combined with the "stress-is-enhancing" mindset, which was developed by Dr. Alia Crum and colleagues and is based on how we think about the effects of stress. When people are educated about the negative effects of stress, their performance declines. However, when people are educated about the positive effects of stress, they show improved performance on difficult cognitive tasks.

How Does Stress Enhance Performance?
Stress signals the body and brain to mobilize more resources to better meet challenges. Stress may feel uncomfortable, but it also:

Increases adrenaline and dopamine release in the brain and body, leading to heightened alertness, increased energy, and elevated focus.
Improves cognition (thinking) and causes release of neurotrophins (neural growth factors) that improve learning and memory by assisting neuroplasticity (brain rewiring).
Quick bouts of stress (1-2 hours or less) boost the immune system to protect against illness. Longer bouts can be problematic, especially if they alter sleep. See the episode on mastering stress for more information.
Takeaways & Tools
Even though stress will not always feel good in the moment, adjust your mindset to remind yourself that stress puts you in an action-oriented state to enhance performance.
You can change (and lower) your own stress response by remembering the positive benefits of stress.
With practice, you will feel more comfortable under stress and build up your stress tolerance.
As covered in the full-length Huberman Lab episode on growth mindset, when a stress-is-enhancing mindset is combined with a growth mindset, the results are synergistic (greater than the sum of each), long-lasting and in many cases generalize to many useful scenarios: relationships, athletics, academics, and more. In short, we can all do well to adopt these mindsets through cognitive feedback and praise, reframing “failures” and action.

Stay Connected
New Huberman Lab episodes are out each Monday on YouTube and all major podcast platforms. Please subscribe to those channels. I post additional science and science-based tools on Instagram, X/Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn.

Thank you for your interest in science!

Best wishes,
Andrew